Montevista es un municipio filipino de la provincia Valle de Compostela.

== Barangayes ==
Est subdividido en 20 barangayes.

== Historia ==
Municipio creado el 18 de junio de 1966 con sede en el barrio de San Jos y formado por los siguientes lugares:
De Nabunturan los barrios de San Jos y Bankerohn y parte de Linon.
De Compostela el barrio de Nuevas Visayas y parte de Siocn.
De Moncayo el barrio de Bankerohn y parte de Olaycn.
De Asuncin parte del barrio de Camansa.
De Nueva Corella parte del barrio de Camansi.
Sitios de Nuevo Tibungco, Nuevo Dalaguete, Camantangn, Mayan, Maputi, Sambayn, Sayoro, San Vicente, Inabatn, Tapia, Nueva Calape, Canidkid, Baguinonn, Daomn, Alimadmad, Tandagun y nuevo Tubign.

"...The boundary which shall separate the Municipality of Montevista from the mother municipalities of Nabunturan, Compostela, Monkayo, Asuncion and New Corella shall be:
beginning from Casangay Bridge in Barrio Linoan, Municipality of Nabunturan, at Km. 96 along the Davao-Agusan Highway, running west up to the intersection of Saug River and Pongtod Creek at Barrio Camansa, Municipality of Asuncion;
thence running northward along the east side of the Saug River up to Barrio Camansi, Municipality of New Corella;
thence running through a straight imaginary line to Sitio Monte Alto, Barrio Camansi;
thence to the Concrete Box Culvert of Small Olaycon Creek, Barrio Olayco, Municipality of Monkayo, at Km. 111 along the Davao-Agusan Highway;
thence to Sitio Tandawan, Barrio New Visayas, Municipality of Compostela, where it intersects the Compostela-Monkayo boundary line;
thence running southward up to the Point where it intersects the Compostela-Nabunturan boundary line in Barrio Siocon opposite the mouth of the Casangay Creek at Manat River;
and then running west up to Casangay Bridge at Km. 96 along the Davao-Agusan Highway, Municipality of Nabunturan..."

Hasta 1988 Montevista formaba parte de la provincia de Davao del Norte, pasando entonces a formar parte de la nueva provincia de Valle de Compostela.

== Referencias ==