Sid Neigum is a Canadian Fashion Designer. He currently lives and works in Toronto.

== Career ==
In 2009, Sid Neigum graduated with a Diploma in Fashion Design and Apparel Production from Edmonton's MC College. After graduating, he moved to New York City to attend the Fashion Institute of Technology and intern for Yigal Azrouel. In March 2011, Neigum presented his first collection at Toronto Fashion Week (also known as World MasterCard Fashion Week). One year after Neigums first collection, in April 2012, he received the Toronto Fashion Incubators New Labels Award, an honour accompanied by a $25,000 cash prize sponsored by Suzanne A. Rogers, free studio space at the Toronto Fashion Incubator for one year, and editorial coverage in Flare Magazine. Upon receiving this Neigum moved from New York to Toronto. In 2014, he won the Mercedes-Benz Start Up Award, which included a $30,000 grant, and mentorships from Fashion Magazines editor in chief, Bernadette Morra and IMG Canadas Carolyn Quinn. That same year, Neigums line was purchased by The Room at The Bay. In February 2015, Neigum won the Swarovski Emerging Talent Award at the Canadian Arts and Fashion Awards, which awarded $10,000 and mentorships from Natasha Koifman of NKPR Inc and Suzanne Timmins, SVP and fashion director of Hudson's Bay Company and Lord & Taylor. Neigums work has been featured in Vogue Italia, Women's Wear Daily, Fashion Magazine, Elle Magazine and Business of Fashion. Neigum has dressed Coco Rocha, Jennifer Aniston, Jada Pinkett Smith, Stacey McKenzie, and MTV's Jessi Cruickshank.

== Reception ==
Nicholas Mellamphy, buying director for The Room at The Bay was quoted saying, Without question Sid Neigum is the most exciting Canadian designer to hit the runway in a long time. He later went on to say in an interview with Business of Fashion, Women who are buying into big European brands like Azzedine Alaa are also buying into Sids collection. When a consumer has the ability to buy anyone but buys someone new, it shows that the designer has the ability to penetrate the market.

== References ==