Body worship is any practice of physically revering a part of another person's body, and is usually done as a submissive act in the context of BDSM. Typical kinds of body worship include worship of muscles, the penis, the vagina, or the buttocks. Body worship is popular among people of all sexual orientations and gender identities.
Usually accompanied by prostration, re-enforcing a sense of inferiority, a "sub" generally licks, kisses and sucks their dominant's body part, and is not allowed to touch it in a more conventional way. The aspect of erotic humiliation is perhaps appreciated by bearing in mind the commonplace phrase "kiss my ass".
Worshiping a body can also be done because the worshiper is in awe of the body part and wishes to praise that beauty. Although encouragement may be provided, verbally or by spanking, body worship is typically received more or less passively, the worshiped party aloof. Facesitting and smothering are forms of body worship which differ chiefly because of their aggressive approach.
Body worship is a common theme in the work of Japanese fetish artist Namio Harukawa.

== SubsetsEdit ==
Penis worship generally describes a sexual obsession of a submissive with the penis of their dominant partner; or any type of sexual game in which a submissive is motivated by a real or pretended attraction to their partner's penis.
Penis worship may also describe a BDSM practice in which a submissive kisses and licks the penis of the dominant partner. It is considered by some as a particularly degrading form of domination and will usually involve the submissive partner kneeling or in another lowly position, treating the person being worshiped as the dominant. In particular facesitting or smothering may be applied in order to emphasise the control of the dominant over the submissive. A queening stool may also be used to facilitate this activity.
Other schools of thought consider the penis worship as a spiritual-religious activity, whether it's a religious ritual involving a penis or a ritual where the penis itself is incarnation of god. Some books were written about this subject.
Similarly, vagina worship (or oral servitude) generally describes a sexual obsession of a submissive with the vagina and/or anus of their dominant partner; or any type of sexual game in which a submissive is motivated by a real or pretended attraction to their partner's vagina.
In BDSM, vagina worship may also describe a practice in which a submissive kisses and licks the vagina and/or anus of the dominant partner. Facesitting or smothering may be practiced, and a queening stool may be utilized.
Ass worship may be practiced. See Cultural history of the buttocks.
Foot worship is a practice in foot fetishism.
Muscle worship is body worship pertaining to the muscles.

== See alsoEdit ==

Phallus#Religion
Boot worship
Partialism
Phallic architecture
Lingam
Phallus paintings in Bhutan

== ReferencesEdit ==

== SourcesEdit ==
"a book about: cock worship (and semen)", David Strongarm.