Historia Placitorum Coron or The History of the Pleas of the Crown is an influential treatise on the criminal law of England, written by Sir Matthew Hale and published posthumously with notes by Sollom Emlyn by E. and R. Nutt, and R. Gosling (the assigns of Edward Sayer), for F. Gyles, T. Woodward, and C. Davis in 1736. The book was published despite an instruction in Hale's will that none of his manuscripts was to be printed after his death unless he had ordered the publication during his lifetime. This was defended by Emlyn on the basis that it was a work of enormous importance; that he appeared to have revoked this instruction in a codicil; and that, in any event, it was obvious that he had intended to publish it. He further observed that the order was the result of fear that the text would be altered or abridged.
The book is divided into two parts. The first part deals with substantive law and the second part deals with procedure.

== Bibliography ==
Hale, Matthew (1800), Historia Placitorum Coron: The History of the Pleas of the Crown, by Sir Matthew Hale. Pub. from the Original Manuscripts by Sollom Emlyn. With Additional Notes and References to Modern Cases Concerning the Pleas of the Crown. By George Wilson. A New Ed. And an Abridgment of the Statutes Relating to Felonies Continued to the Present Time, with Notes and References, by Thomas Dogherty 1, London: Printed by E. Rider, for T. Payne, H. L. Gardner, W. Otridge, E. and R. Brooke and J. Rider seven others in London, OCLC 645127647 .
Hale, Matthew (1800), Historia Placitorum Coron: The History of the Pleas of the Crown, by Sir Matthew Hale. Pub. from the Original Manuscripts by Sollom Emlyn. With Additional Notes and References to Modern Cases Concerning the Pleas of the Crown. By George Wilson. A New Ed. And an Abridgment of the Statutes Relating to Felonies Continued to the Present Time, with Notes and References, by Thomas Dogherty 2, London: Printed by E. Rider, for T. Payne, H. L. Gardner, W. Otridge, E. and R. Brooke and J. Rider seven others in London, OCLC 645127647 .
Hale, Matthew (1847), Historia Placitorum Coronae: The History of the Pleas of the Crown by Sir Matthew Hale, Knt. Some Time Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench. First Published from His Lordship's Original Manuscript, and the Several References to the Records Examined by the Originals, with Notes by Sollom Emlyn, of Lincoln's Inn, Esq. With a Table of the Principal Matters. First American Edition. With Notes and References to Later Cases by W. A. Stokes and E. Ingersoll of the Philadelphia Bar. In Two Volumes 1 (1st American ed.), Philadelphia, Penn.: Robert H. Small, OCLC 837241071 .
Hale, Matthew (1847), Historia Placitorum Coronae: The History of the Pleas of the Crown by Sir Matthew Hale, Knt. Some Time Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench. First Published from His Lordship's Original Manuscript, and the Several References to the Records Examined by the Originals, with Notes by Sollom Emlyn, of Lincoln's Inn, Esq. With a Table of the Principal Matters. First American Edition. With Notes and References to Later Cases by W. A. Stokes and E. Ingersoll of the Philadelphia Bar. In Two Volumes 2 (1st American ed.), Philadelphia, Penn.: Robert H. Small, OCLC 837241071 .

== See also ==
Books of authority

== References ==