Takayama (, Takayama-shi) is a city located in Gifu Prefecture, Japan.
As of July 2011, the city has an estimated population of 92,369 and a population density of 42 persons per km. The total area is 2,177.67 km.
Takayama was settled as far back as the Jmon period. Takayama is best known for its inhabitants' expertise in carpentry. It is believed carpenters from Takayama worked on the Imperial Palace in Kyoto and on many of the temples in Kyoto and Nara. The town and its culture, as they exist today, took shape at the end of the 16th century, when the Kanamori clan built Takayama Castle. About a hundred years later the city came under the rule of the Tokugawa shogunate. However, the high altitude and separation from other areas of Japan kept the area fairly isolated, allowing Takayama to develop its own culture over about a 300-year period.

== SignificanceEdit ==

The city was formed on November 1, 1936 by a merger of the towns of Takayama and Onada.
On February 1, 2005, the town of Kuguno, and the villages of Asahi, Kiyomi, Miya, Nykawa, Shkawa and Takane (all from no District), the town of Kokufu, and the village of Kamitakara (both from Yoshiki District) were merged into Takayama, which made Takayama the largest city in Japan (by surface area).
The city is popularly known as Hida-Takayama (), in reference to the old Hida Province, to differentiate it from other places named Takayama. The name 'Takayama' means 'tall mountain'.

== GeographyEdit ==

=== ClimateEdit ===
Located in the heart of the Japanese Alps, Takayama falls under a humid continental climate (Koppen Dfa) with some characteristics of humid subtropical climate. It features four distinct seasons with a wide range of temperature between the summer and winter, somewhat resembling parts of Northern Japan and Hokkaid. Takayama is also part of the heavy snow area of Japan (gsetsu-chitai, ) with snowfall most days throughout the winter season. Takayama along with many other cities and towns exposed to the Sea of Japan experience lake effect snow, generating some of the highest, most consistent snowfall in the world.

Spring is short lived, usually dry with mild temperatures and plenty of sunshine. Cherry blossoms (sakura, ) can be seen arriving at Takayama from the middle to the end of April, around 3 weeks later than Nagoya.
Summer begins around the end of May to the beginning of June, it is humid and wet with the arrival of the rain season (tsuyu, ), receiving high rainfall amounts during this period. It then yields to a hotter and generally less humid end to the summer with day-time temperatures usually higher than 30 C (86 F) and occasionally higher than 35 C (95 F) coupled with plenty of strong sunshine.
Autumn approaches during the middle of October and is short, yet dry and cool with diminishing sunlight. Autumn foliage (ky, can be seen in the Takayama area from the end of October to the first week of November.
Winter arrives around the beginning of December and is moderately long, cold and icy with high amounts of snowfall annually amounting to an average of 5.11m (201.2 inches) commonly leading to the development of snow banks in the outer areas of the city. The first snowfall of the season usually arrives at the end of November and lasts through until the beginning of April. Yearly low temperatures in the city centre do on occasions drop as low as -15 C (5 F) and occasionally fail to reach above freezing point during the day.

=== Adjoining communitiesEdit ===
Nagano Prefecture: machi, Matsumoto, Kiso (town) (Kiso District)
Gifu Prefecture: Gero, Gujo, Shirakawa (no District), Hida
Toyama Prefecture: Toyama
Ishikawa Prefecture: Hakusan
Fukui Prefecture: Ono

== Sister citiesEdit ==

=== Within JapanEdit ===

Matsumoto, Nagano Prefecture (est. November 1, 1971)
Hiratsuka, Kanagawa Prefecture (est. October 22, 1982)
Echizen, Fukui Prefecture (est. October 22, 1982)
Kaminoyama, Yamagata Prefecture (est. October 13, 1988)

=== OverseasEdit ===
 Denver, Colorado, United States (est. June 27, 1960)
 Lijiang, Yunnan, People's Republic of China (est. March 21, 2002)
  Sibiu, Romania, (est. September 4, 2012)
 Urubamba, Cusco, Peru (est. August 22, 2013)

== AttractionsEdit ==

Mount Norikura, a dormant volcano that is 3,026 meters (9,928 ft.) tall is located just east of Takayama. A bus takes visitors to a point near the summit.
Shin-Hotaka Ropeway and Okuhida Spa Resort. There is a 3,200 meter ropeway offering great views of the Northern Alps.
Old Private Houses. There are a variety of old homes in the heart of Takayama that are cultural artifacts.
Takayama has a nice morning market near the river in the center of town.
The Hida Minzoku Mura Folk Village folk village is also nearby.
Takayama is the home of one of the three largest Shinto festivals in Japan. The Takayama Festivals are two distinctive festivals. The Yatai (floats) used during the festivals can be found in the Takayama Yatai Kaikan (Takayama Festival Float Exhibition Hall). Nearby is the Sakurayama Nikk Kan, an exhibit of 1/10 scale replicas of Nikk's famous Toshogu shrine.
Takayama-shi Kyodo-kan is a local history museum with handicrafts and traditional items.
Takayama Jinya is a historical government house that has been restored to its earlier design and is open for tours.
Kusakabe Folk Museum is a local museum in an old merchant's home.
Hida-Kokubunji Temple is the oldest structure in Takayama. It has a 3-level pagoda and stands beside a ginkgo tree that is over 1,200 years old.
Ankokuji Temple and Storehouse is an ancient structure from 1408 that is recognized as a national treasure.
Hida Takayama Kur Alp (Hida Takayama Spa Land) is a large public bath and swimming area.
The ruins of Matsukura Castle are located in the city.
World Shrine to Su-God, the world wide headquarters of Sukyo Mahikari
Hida Tsh-g shrine

== CultureEdit ==

Takayama is known for its local foods, including sansai (mountain vegetables) and wasakana (river fish) as well as its beef, soba, ramen, and sake.
In addition to its fame for its carpentry, Takayama is well known for its lacquerware, pottery, and furniture.
The mountain city of Takayama is associated with charms known as "sarubobos", which are traditionally passed from grandmothers to grandchildren and mothers to daughters, though are now often sold as souvenirs. The city and the Hida area in which it is located are also known for carpentry, and its carpenters are called Hida no takumi.
Around the east of the city is a walking tour, called the Higashiyama Walking Course ( Higashiyama-hokd), which goes past many shrines and temples to Shiroyama Park ( Shiroyama-ken). Takayama holds two festivals every year, Sann Matsuri () in Spring and Hachiman Matsuri () in Autumn. These festivals are among the most popular in Japan.

Takayama was also the basis for the setting in the anime Hyouka. The Takayama festival is known as the Kanya Gestival in Hyouka.

== TransportationEdit ==

=== RailroadEdit ===
Central Japan Railway Company
Takayama Main Line: Nagisa, Kuguno, Hida-Ichinomiya, Takayama, Hozue, Hida-Kokufu

== See alsoEdit ==
Takayama Festival

== ReferencesEdit ==

== External linksEdit ==
Takayama City official website (Japanese)
Takayama City official website
Gifu crossroads (official blog about tourism in Gifu)