Events from the year 1958 in the United Kingdom.

== Incumbents ==
Monarch  Elizabeth II
Prime Minister  Harold Macmillan (Conservative)

== Events ==
6 January  Chancellor of the Exchequer Peter Thorneycroft resigns over opposition to spending cuts, an event dismissed the following day by the Prime Minister as "little local difficulties".
14 January  TWW, the ITV franchise for South Wales and the West Of England goes on the air.
6 February  The Manchester United F.C. team plane flying back from a European Cup tie in Belgrade crashes on take-off after refuelling at Munich Airport in West Germany. 21 of the 44 people on board are killed. Seven of them are Manchester United players: captain and left-back Roger Byrne (aged 28), centre-half Mark Jones (aged 24), right-half Eddie Colman (aged 21), centre-forward Tommy Taylor (aged 26), full-back Geoff Bent (aged 25), left-winger David Pegg (aged 22), and inside-forward Billy Whelan (aged 22). Eight of the nine sports journalists travelling on the plane are also killed, including the former Manchester City and England national football team goalkeeper Frank Swift. Among the survivors are 10 United players and manager Matt Busby, who is reported to be seriously injured. Outside-right Johnny Berry and left-half Duncan Edwards are also reported to be in a serious condition.
20 February  The government announces plans to close the 300-year-old dockyards at Sheerness on the Isle of Sheppey, which would result in more than 2,500 workers losing their jobs.
21 February  Duncan Edwards dies of his injuries in a Munich hospital 15 days after the Munich air crash. Edwards, who was 21 and rated by many as the finest player in England, is the eighth Manchester United player to die.
25 February  Bertrand Russell launches the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, initiated at a meeting called by Canon John Collins on 15 January.
27 February  The final death toll of the Munich air disaster reaches 23 with the death of co-pilot Kenneth Rayment in hospital.
28 February  The Victorian Society, the pressure group for Victorian architecture, holds its first meeting.
March  Removal of Derbyshire county administrative headquarters from Derby to Matlock begins.
2 March  A British team led by Sir Vivian Fuchs completes the first crossing of the Antarctic using Sno-Cat caterpillar tractors and dogsled teams in 99 days.
21 March  Opening of the London Planetarium, the first planetarium in Britain.
24 March  Work on the M1, Britain's first full length motorway, begins. The first stretch of the motorway, due to open next year, will run from London to the Warwickshire-Northamptonshire border. During the 1960s, the remainder of the motorway will be built to give London an unbroken motorway link with Leeds some 200 miles away.
1 April  BBC Radiophonic Workshop created.
4 April7 April  The first protest march for the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament from Hyde Park, London to Aldermarston, Berkshire, demanding a ban on nuclear weapons.
7 April  The Church of England gives its moral backing to family planning.
27 April  BOAC's first de Havilland Comet 4 makes its maiden flight.
30 April
The Life Peerages Act receives Royal Assent; the Act allows the creation of life peers who can sit in the House of Lords. As life peerages could be bestowed on women, this Act allows for women to sit in the House of Lords for the first time.
The musical My Fair Lady, starring Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews, opens in London's Drury Lane theatre.

3 May  Bolton Wanderers win the FA Cup for the fourth time in their history with a 2-0 win over Manchester United at Wembley Stadium. Both goals are scored by centre-forward Nat Lofthouse.
21 May  United Kingdom Postmaster General Ernest Marples announces that from December, Subscriber Trunk Dialling will be introduced in the Bristol area.
27 May  Shelagh Delaney's A Taste of Honey staged by Theatre Workshop at the Theatre Royal Stratford East.
4 June  The Duke of Edinburgh's Award presented for the first time at Buckingham Palace.
7 June  Ian Donald publishes an article in The Lancet which describes the diagnostic use of ultrasound.
9 June  The Queen officially re-opens Gatwick Airport, which has been expanded at a cost of more than 7million.
3 July  Last dbutante formally presented to the Queen, at Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh.
10 July  First parking meters installed in Britain.
17 July  British paratroopers arrive in Jordan; King Hussein has asked for help against pressure from Iraq.
1826 July  British Empire and Commonwealth Games held in Cardiff.
24 July  The first life peerage is created.
26 July
The Queen gives her son Charles the customary title of Prince of Wales.
Abolition of the presentation of dbutantes to the royal court.

August  The first United States Thor missiles are deployed in the UK, operated by No. 77 Squadron RAF at RAF Feltwell.
1 August
Ian Fraser, Baron Fraser of Lonsdale becomes the first life peer.
Premiere of Carry on Sergeant, the first Carry On film.

8 August  Barbara Wootton, Baroness Wootton of Abinger becomes the first female peer.
29 August  Release of Cliff Richard's debut single Move It, which reaches No. 2 in the charts. It is credited with being one of the first authentic rock and roll songs produced outside the United States.
30 August
Riots between blacks and whites in Notting Hill, London.
Southern Television, the ITV franchise for South Central and South East England goes on the air.

1 September  The First Cod War between UK and Iceland breaks out.
5 September  A severe storm over south east England seriously disrupts communications.
16 September  Relaxation of restrictions on hire purchase.
1 October  The sovereignty of Christmas Island is transferred from the UK to Australia.
4 October  BOAC uses new Comet jets to become the first airline to fly jet passenger services across the Atlantic.
11 October  First broadcast of the long-running BBC Television sports programme Grandstand.
16 October  First broadcast of the long-running BBC Television children's programme Blue Peter.
21 October  The first life peers, including the first women peers, enter the House of Lords. The Baronesses Swanborough (Stella Isaacs, Marchioness of Reading) and Wootton (Barbara Wootton) are the first women to take their seats.
25 October  The Short SC.1 experimental VTOL aircraft makes its first free vertical flight.
28 October  The State Opening of Parliament is broadcast on television for the first time.
10 November  Donald Campbell sets the world water speed record at 248.62 mph.
24 November  Exhibition of computers held at Earl's Court, London; the first of its kind in the world.
25 November  The Austin FX4 London taxi goes on sale, it would remain in production until 1997.
30 November  During the live broadcast of the Armchair Theatre play Underground on the ITV network, actor Gareth Jones has a fatal heart attack between two of his scenes while in make-up.
5 December
The Preston Bypass, Britain's first motorway, is opened by Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
Subscriber Trunk Dialling (STD) is inaugurated by The Queen when she dials a call from Bristol to Edinburgh and speaks to Lord Provost.
First service by a Royal National Lifeboat Institution Oakley-class self-righting life-boat, RNLB J.G. Graves of Sheffield (ON 942) at Scarborough.

10 December  English biochemist Frederick Sanger wins his first Nobel Prize in Chemistry "for his work on the structure of proteins, especially that of insulin" (his second comes in 1980).
24 December  1958 Bristol Britannia 312 crash: A BOAC Bristol Britannia airliner crashes near Winkton in Hampshire on a routine test flight.

=== Undated ===
First boutique, His Clothes, to be opened in Carnaby Street, London, by John Stephen.
British Nylon Spinners introduce the name Bri-Nylon.
German-born British mathematician Klaus Roth wins the Fields Medal for his work on the ThueSiegelRoth theorem.

== Publications ==
H. E. Bates' novel The Darling Buds of May, first in the Larkin family series.
John Betjeman's Collected Poems.
Michael Bond's children's story A Bear Called Paddington, introducing the character Paddington Bear.
Agatha Christie's novel Ordeal by Innocence.
Lawrence Durrell's novels Balthazar and Mountolive from The Alexandria Quartet.
Ian Fleming's James Bond novel Dr. No.
Graham Greene's novel Our Man in Havana.
Dr D. G. Hessayon's guide Be Your Own Gardening Expert, first in the best selling gardening book series in history.
Alan Sillitoe's first novel Saturday Night and Sunday Morning.
T.H. White's Arthurian novel The Once and Future King.
Raymond Williams' book Culture and Society

== Births ==
24 January  Jools Holland, British musician
27 January  Alan Milburn, British Labour politician and MP for Darlington
29 January  Linda Smith, comedian (died 2006)
1 February  Eleanor Laing, British Conservative politician, MP for Epping Forest, and Shadow Minister for Women
7 February  Matt Ridley, English science writer
11 February  Michael Jackson, British broadcast executive
12 February  Steve Grand, English computer scientist
17 February  Steve Fox, footballer and gardener (d. 2012)
20 February  James Wilby, British actor
1 March  Nik Kershaw, English singer
3 March  Miranda Richardson, English actress
5 March  Andy Gibb, English-born singer (died 1988)
8 March  Gary Numan, British singer
13 March  Caryl Phillips, British writer
16 March  Chris Mole, British Labour politician and MP for Ipswich
18 March  Neil Brand, British writer and composer
21 March  Gary Oldman, English actor
6 April
Graeme Base, Australian children's illustrator and author
Jackie Gallagher, English footballer

12 April  Will Sergeant, English guitarist (Echo & the Bunnymen)
14 April  Peter Capaldi, Scottish actor and director
15 April
Benjamin Zephaniah, British writer and musician
Abu Hamza al-Masri, Muslim cleric convicted of inciting racial hatred and murder
Sir Robert Smith, 3rd Baronet, British Liberal Democrat politician and MP for West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine

24 April  Brian Paddick, British police commander
25 April  Fish, Scottish singer
3 May  Sandi Toksvig, Danish-born comedian, author, and radio presenter
4 May
Caroline Spelman, British Conservative politician, MP for Meriden, Shadow Secretary of State for Local and Devolved Government Affairs
Jane Kennedy, British Labour politician, MP for Liverpool Wavertree

8 May  Brooks Newmark, American-English businessman and politician, Lord of the Treasury
18 May  Toyah Willcox, actress and singer
25 May  Paul Weller, English singer-songwriter (The Jam, The Style Council)
7 June  Ivan Henderson, British Labour politician and MP for Harwich
23 June  John Henry Hayes, British Conservative politician, MP for South Holland and The Deepings, and Chairman of the Cornerstone Group
1July  Les Morton, English racewalker
6 July  Jennifer Saunders, British comedienne
30 July
Kate Bush, British singer and songwriter
Daley Thompson, athlete and Olympic champion

7 August  Bruce Dickinson, English musician
10 August  Rosie Winterton, British Labour politician, MP for Doncaster Central, and member of the Privy Council
13 August  Feargal Sharkey, Northern Irish musician, former lead singer of The Undertones.
14 August  Philip Dunne, British Conservative politician and MP for Ludlow
29 August  Lenny Henry, British entertainer
18 September  Linda Lusardi, British model, actress, and television presenter
21 September  Simon Mayo, British radio presenter
23 September  Danielle Dax, British musician
27 September  Irvine Welsh, Scottish novelist
October  Craig Murray, former UK Ambassador to Uzbekistan
14 October  Thomas Dolby, English musician
20 October  Dave Finlay, Northern Irish professional wrestler
26 October  Shaun Woodward, British Labour politician and MP for St Helens South
27 October  Simon Le Bon, English musician (Duran Duran)
1 November  Mark Austin, English newsreader (ITN)
2 November  Mark Phillip Hendrick, British Labour Co-operative politician and MP for Preston
25 November  Kim Ashfield, British model
2 December  Andrew George, British Liberal Democrat politician and MP for St Ives
6 December  Nick Park, English filmmaker and animator

=== Unknown date ===
Tim Bevan, New Zealand-born film producer (Working Title Films)
Omar Bakri Muhammad, Syrian-born Muslim cleric

== Deaths ==
6 February  Manchester United F.C. players and associates in the Munich air disaster:
Roger Byrne team captain (born 1929)
Geoff Bent (born 1932)
Eddie Colman (born 1936)
Mark Jones (born 1933)
David Pegg (born 1935)
Tommy Taylor (born 1932)
Billy Whelan (born 1935)
Frank Swift (born 1913), journalist and former Manchester City F.C. and England goalkeeper

11 February  Ernest Jones, Welsh psychoanalyst (born 1879)
13 February  Christabel Pankhurst, English suffragette (born 1880)
21 February  Duncan Edwards, Manchester United footballer (born 1936)
26 March  Phil Mead, English cricketer (born 1887)
16 April  Rosalind Franklin, British crystallographer (born 1920)
19 April  Billy Meredith, Welsh footballer (born 1874)
3 May  Frank Foster, English cricketer (born 1889)
19 May  Ronald Colman, English actor (born 1891)
9 June  Robert Donat, English film and stage actor (born 1905)
13 June  Edwin Keppel Bennett, British writer (born 1887)
28 June  Alfred Noyes, English poet (born 1880)
20 July  Margaret Haig Thomas, Viscountess Rhondda, political campaigner and businesswoman (born 1883)
26 August  Ralph Vaughan Williams, British composer (born 1872)
25 September  Henry Arthur Evans, Welsh Conservative politician (born 1898)
2 October  Marie Stopes, birth control advocate, suffragette and palaeontologist (born 1880)
17 October  Charlie Townsend, English cricketer (born 1876)
24 October  G. E. Moore, British philosopher, author of Principia Ethica (born 1873)
30 October  Rose Macaulay, novelist (born 1881)
24 November  Lord Robert Cecil, English politician and diplomat, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (born 1864)
30 November  Gareth Jones, actor (born 1925)
2 December  Alan McKibbin, Northern Irish politician (born 1892)

== References ==

== See also ==