Eugene Botkin, also Yevgeny Sergeyevich Botkin (Russian:   ; 27 March 1865  17 July 1918) was the court physician for Tsar Nicholas II and Tsarina Alexandra and, while in exile with the family, sometimes treated the hemophilia-related complications of the Tsarevich Alexei Nikolaevich of Russia.
Botkin went into exile with the Romanovs following the Russian Revolution of 1917 and was murdered with the family at Ekaterinburg on 17 July 1918. Like them, he was canonized as a passion-bearer by the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia in 1981.

== Early life and careerEdit ==
Botkin was the son of Sergey Botkin, who had been a court physician under Tsars Alexander II and Alexander III. Botkin himself studied medicine at the University of St. Petersburg and at the Universities of Berlin and Heidelberg. He was later appointed chief physician at St. Georgievsky Hospital in St. Petersburg. He served with distinction aboard the St. Georgievsky Hospital Train during the Russo-Japanese War.
He was appointed court physician in 1908. Botkin married and had four children, Dimitri, Yuri, Gleb, and Tatiana. His marriage broke up under the strain caused by Botkin's dedication to the Romanovs and his long hours at court. His wife, Olga, started an affair with the children's German tutor and asked for, and was granted, a divorce.
Botkin was later devastated when his oldest sons, Dimitri and Yuri, were killed in action during World War I. Botkin became increasingly religious and "developed an increasing abhorrence for the flesh," according to his son Gleb.
"From a very tender age, his beautiful and noble nature was complete," his brother Peter recalled later. "He was never like other children. Always sensitive, of a delicate, inner sweetness of extraordinary soul, he had a horror of any kind of struggle or fight. We other boys would fight with a fury. He would not take part in our combats, but when our pugilism took on a dangerous character he would stop the combatants at risk of injuring himself. He was very studious and conscientious in his studies. For a profession he chose medicine: to help, to succor, to soothe, to heal without end."

== Exile and deathEdit ==
Botkin felt it was his duty to accompany the Romanovs into exile, not only because of his responsibility to his patients, the Romanov family, but also to his country. Botkin was considered a friend by Tsar Nicholas II, and the doctor also often spoke with Tsarina Alexandra in her native German and acted as a translator for her when she received a Russian delegation.
White Russian Army investigators found this unfinished letter, written in his quarters on the night of 16 July 1918:
The letter was interrupted when Commander Yakov Yurovsky, the head of the command at the Ipatiev House, knocked on Botkin's door. He ordered the entire Romanov party to dress and come downstairs, on the premise that there was gunfire in the town, and they were to be evacuated. In fact, the entire family and their servants (including Botkin) were murdered a short time later.

== Honours and awardsEdit ==
Order of St. Vladimir, 3rd and 2nd classes with swords,
Order of St. Anna, 2nd class
Order of St. Stanislaus, 3rd class
Order of St. Sava, 2nd class
Bulgarian "For Citizenship Award"

== In Literature and DramaEdit ==
Dr. Botkin features as a character in the play, Ekaterinburg about the time in captivity of the Romanovs and their retainers inside the Ipatiev House in Ekaterinburg.

== See alsoEdit ==
Romanov sainthood

== ReferencesEdit ==
King, Greg; Wilson, Penny (2003). The Fate of the Romanovs. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 0-471-20768-3. 
Kurth, Peter; Christopher, Peter; Radzinsky, Edvard (1995). Tsar: The Lost World of Nicholas and Alexandra. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-50787-3.

== NotesEdit ==