"Baby Come Back" is an American classic by the 70's pop band Player. It was released in late 1977 as the first single from their self-titled first studio album. The song was their biggest single, hitting number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 10 on the soul charts, in 1978. It was the breakthrough single for the band, gaining them mainstream success, and hit number one, knocking label-mates The Bee Gees' "How Deep Is Your Love" from the top spot. Written by lead singer Peter Beckett and J.C. Crowley, the founders of Player, and sung by Beckett, it is listed 8th in the Top Ten Yacht Rock Songs Of All Time.

== Uses in other mediaEdit ==
In 1997, Lisa Stansfield released the song as a bonus track on the Japanese version of Lisa Stansfield album.
The song has been used in the film Safe Men (1998). In 2011, it was the source of a parody by Chicago artist, Magic 1, entitled "Cutty Come Back", which alludes to the Chicago Bears' woes without quarterback Jay Cutler. The song is also used in the Michael Bay blockbuster Transformers, when the Autobot Bumblebee communicates with its new owner Sam Witwicky through songs on the radio. In this case, after an incident with the girl he is attracted to, Mikaela, gets out of the car and Sam tries to persuade her to "come back". The lyrics of the song are expected to accomplish this desire, as laid out by the filmmakers, though it is unlikely given the context that she would actually come back anyway.
Actress/singer, Vanessa Hudgens, sampled the song in her debut single, Come Back To Me on her debut album, V in 2006.
In The Simpsons episode "Homer Alone," when Homer calls the "Department of Missing Babies" after losing Maggie, the hold music is a newly recorded version of the song, by Peter Beckett and J.C. Crowley.
The song was featured in a 2011 Australian commercial for the Toyota Hilux.
The song was also used in a Swiffer commercial in the U.S.
This song was sung by Hank Hill and Elroy "Lucky" Kleinschmidt in the Point After Lounge in the "Church Hopping" episode of King of the Hill.
On a May 2014 episode of General Hospital, precocious Spencer Cassadine attempted to woo back Emma Scorpio-Drake by hiring Player to perform the song at the Nurses Ball. Spencer's great-grandmother Lesley Webber was supposedly a groupie of the band in the 1970s.

== Chart performanceEdit ==

== ReferencesEdit ==

"Joel Whitburn's, Presents, Top R&B/Hip-Hop Singles: 1942-2004", 2004