Felissa Rose (born May 23, 1969) is an American actress, known for her role as Angela Baker in the 1983 cult classic slasher film, Sleepaway Camp, which she reprised in the film Return to Sleepaway Camp which was written and directed by Sleepaway Camp creator Robert Hiltzik. Rose has been given the title "Scream Queen" because of her involvement and success within the "Horror" film genre. She has over 50 film credits in total over the span of her film career. A few major credits in her film career would include The Perfect House 2012, Silent Night, Zombie Night 2009.

== Early lifeEdit ==
Felissa Rose was raised in New York. She was born Felissa Rose Esposito in Greenwich Village in Manhattan, New York City, and grew up in Woodbury on Long Island.

== Movie careerEdit ==
After appearing in Sleepaway Camp, she quit acting to attend school at New York University (NYU) in the Tisch School of the Arts. In 1999, she was tracked down by Jeff Hayes who runs The Official Sleepaway Camp Website: www.sleepawaycampmovies.com through a letter he sent her in the mail asking her to do an interview for the website and gauge her interest in doing a new Sleepaway Camp sequel. Shortly thereafter, Hayes met with Rose in New York and the duo began her resurrection through the website and followed things up with Return To Sleepaway Camp. She has since returned to cinema and has appeared in such films as Chris Watson's Zombiegeddon (2003), Andreas Schnaas' Nikos (2003), and Steve Taylor's Sludge (2005). She has also appeared in two films by New Jersey filmmaker Dante Tomaselli: Horror (2002) and Satan's Playground (2005). In addition Felissa co-hosted the 2005 Village Halloween Parade in New York City with fellow scream queens Debbie Rochon and Raine Brown. She also had a cameo role in the sequel to the original Sleepaway Camp titled Return to Sleepaway Camp. In the sequel, she reprises the role of Angela Baker. The movie had a straight to DVD release on November 4, 2008. She also appears in Hotdog Casserole,written and directed by Chris Raab, as the mother in a dysfunctional family. Rose starred in a role as Mother in the segment "Dinner Guest" in the anthology horror film, The Perfect House. She also portrayed forensic pathologist Amy Short in the Francis Xavier thriller Poe.

== Personal lifeEdit ==
Rose lives in California with her husband, CKY singer/ guitarist Deron Miller, and their two daughters, Bianca Rose (born June 8, 2005) and Lola Marue (born March 4, 2007) and son, Thomas Carver (born August 29, 2009). Rose and Miller were co-stars in Dave Campfield's 2008 horror comedy Caesar and Otto's Summer Camp Massacre.

== Partial filmographyEdit ==

== ReferencesEdit ==

== External linksEdit ==
The Official Felissa Rose Website
Felissa Rose at the Internet Movie Database
Official MySpace