The year 1946 in science and technology involved some significant events, listed below.

== Astronomy ==
January 10  The United States Army Signal Corps' Project Diana bounces radar waves off the Moon.
Reginald Aldworth Daly of Harvard University first proposes a giant impact hypothesis to account for formation of the moon.

== Biology ==
November 10  Peter Scott opens the Slimbridge Wetland Reserve in England.
Karl von Frisch publishes "Die Tnze der Bienen" ("The dances of the bees").
Edmund Jaeger discovers and later documents, in The Condor, a state of extended torpor, approaching hibernation, in a bird, the common poorwill.

== Cartography ==
The Chamberlin trimetric projection is developed in 1946 by Wellman Chamberlin for the National Geographic Society.

== Computer science ==
February 1415  ENIAC, the first non-classified all-electronic Turing complete computer, built under the direction of J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, is announced and dedicated at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School of Electrical Engineering. It is programmable by plugboard and uses conditional branching.
December 11  Frederick Williams receives a patent for a random-access memory device.

== Medicine ==
July 14  Dr. Benjamin Spock's The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care is first published in New York; it becomes one of the biggest best-sellers of all time.
Harold Gillies begins to perform sex reassignment surgery on Michael Dillon, including the first female-to-male transsexual phalloplasty.
Chance Brothers of Smethwick, England, produce the first all-glass syringe with interchangeable barrel and plunger, allowing easy mass-sterilisation of components.
Alfred Gilman, with Frederick S. Philips, first publish the results of trials of anti-cancer chemotherapy, using mechlorethamine, carried out with Louis S. Goodman.

== Physics ==
January 1  Atomic Energy Research Establishment established at Harwell, Oxfordshire under John Cockcroft.
The BBGKY hierarchy of equations for s-particle distribution functions is applied to the derivation of kinetic equations by Nikolay Bogolyubov in a paper received in July 1945 and published in 1946 in Russian and in English. The related kinetic transport theory is considered by John Gamble Kirkwood in a paper received in October 1945 and published in March 1946. The first paper by Max Born and Herbert S. Green considering a general kinetic theory of liquids is received in February 1946 and published on 31 December 1946.

== Awards ==
Nobel PrizesPhysics  Percy Williams Bridgman
Chemistry  James B. Sumner, John Howard Northrop, Wendell Meredith Stanley
Medicine  Hermann Joseph Muller

== Births ==
May 11  Robert Jarvik, American co-inventor of the Jarvik-7 artificial heart
June 13  Paul L. Modrich, American biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
June 24  Ellison Onizuka (killed 1986), American astronaut
July 2  Richard Axel, American physiologist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
August 2  Nigel Hitchin, English mathematician
August 11  Marilyn vos Savant, American polymath
September 7  Francisco Varela (died 2001), Chilean-born biologist and philosopher
September 8  Aziz Sancar, Turkish biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
September 28  Morinobu Endo, Japanese chemist
October 14  Kay Redfield Jamison, American clinical psychologist
October 17  Carol Dweck, American social psychologist
December 31  Roy Porter (died 2002), English medical historian
Faiza Al-Kharafi, Kuwaiti electrochemist

== Deaths ==
March 8  Frederick W. Lanchester (born 1868), automotive engineer.
March 23  Gilbert N. Lewis (born 1875), chemist; first to isolate deuterium.
March 26  Gerhard Heilman (born 1859), paleo-ornithologist.
May 2  Simon Flexner (born 1863), pathologist and bacteriologist.
June 14  John Logie Baird (born 1888), inventor.
August 13  H. G. Wells (born 1866), scientific populariser.
September 16  James Hopwood Jeans (born 1877), mathematician and scientist.
October 2  Ignacy Mocicki (born 1867), chemist and President of Poland.
October 4  Barney Oldfield (born 1878), automobile racer.
Israel Aharoni (born 1882), zoologist.

== References ==