Rhema Media (previously known as Rhema Broadcasting Group or RBG) is a Christian media organisation in New Zealand. It owns radio networks Rhema, Life fm and Star, and television station Shine TV. It also publishes Bob Gass's quarterly devotional publication The Word For You Today, and the youth version called Word For You Today. Rhema Media is based in Newton, Auckland and is the founding organisation of United Christian Broadcasters (UCB).
Rhema Media was set up in the 1960s by Christchurch evangelical Richard Berry, following the success of Ecudorian Christian short-wave radio station HCJB. The company's network Rhema began full-time broadcasting in 1978 and Life FM and Star were launched in 1997. Shine TV began in 2002, and The Word radio network operated between 2007 and 2015.

== History ==
In the mid 1960s, the Rhema group started preparing to begin broadcasting. Although private radio was not permitted in new Zealand, Radio Hauraki had begun illegally broadcasting as a pirate station, forcing the government to allow private broadcasting due to its inability to enforce its regulations. Gospel Radio Fellowship used an old church building on Glenfield Crescent to set up studios and a transmitter. The Broadcasting Authority was skeptical about the establishment of a Christian station owned and operated by evangelicals and rejected the station's application for a license in 1972, citing a lack of public interest and a lack of finance and professional staff.
In 1974, Gospel Radio Fellowship changed the name of the station to Radio Rhema, gained the endorsement of Pat Robertson and collected enough funding to employ twenty staff. It failed to obtain a license on its first application, but received one-day licenses for Christchurch in November 1974 and Petone in October 1975 and a 10-day license for the Christmas period in Christchurch in 1976. The broadcasts had to be medium wave, no more than 100 watts and live, and the station was instructed to broadcast only to supporters. In 1978, a license application was successful after the three broadcasts garnered 7,235 members, 48,433 other supporters and endorsements from churches and community groups. Radio Rhema was officially launched in November 1978, with prime minister Rob Muldoon saying the station was inspired by "a faith that moves mountains". The station was allowed to broadcast six hours a day on weekdays and 18 hours a day on weekends. It became the first permanent Christian station in the British Commonwealth and one of the first Christian broadcasters in the world.
In 1980, the Christchurch station obtained an 18-hours-per-day license and had thirty five full-time and ten part-time workers. In 1982, it gained a license in Wellington and had property and six staff in Auckland. The Rhema Media Group began the Life FM and Southern Star networks in 1997. Vice-presidents Richard Berry, Hal Short and Frank Salisbury set up a separate organisation, United Christian Broadcasters (UCB), as an umbrella body for autonomous affiliate broadcasting organisations after receiving comments from people overseas hoping to emulate Rhema's broadcasting model. The first affiliate in Australia supported new Christian radio stations, many called Radio Rhema, before becoming a broadcaster itself, operating as the Vision Radio Network. Other affiliates followed in the United Kingdom, Europe, Africa, Pacific countries and South America. The Dove was set up as an affiliate in Oregon, United States. Smaller broadcasters were also established in Madagascar, Brazil, the Philippines and Estonia.
In 1994, UCB obtained the right to publish Bob Gass's The Word For Today daily devotional in the United Kingdom. After an initial trial, Gass granted UCB the rights to broadcast, publish and distribute the devotional anywhere outside the United States free of charge. In 2011, several million copies of The Word for Today were published every quarter, in about a dozen languages and UCB was a group of 32 organisations that claimed to reach millions of people in at least 24 different languages through radio, television, printed devotionals and websites.
The fifth Labour government put forward plans to renew radio frequencies in 2003, but Rhema Broadcasting Group and the Crown did not agree on the value of re-licensing until 2006. In July 2010, RBG announced it needed to raise $6.4 million over and above its normal operating costs to renew its commercial radio frequencies for the following 20 years. By the end of November, the company still needed $2.4 million and was not in a position to seek external finance, with the frequencies to be returned to the Crown and resold at auction if the money was not raised. The Crown recognised the organisation as a non-profit with limited access to funds and gave it a three month extension on payment, allowing Rhema Broadcasting Group to cover the cost with no interest loans.
From 2007 to 2015, Rhema operated a network of relay stations broadcasting uninterrupted, automated Bible readings to relay stations similar to UCB Bible called The Word. The network's original Hamilton 576 AM and Invercargill 1026 AM frequencies were acquired for Southern Star, but became available when Southern Star starting broadcasting on new AM Network stations in both cities. The Word was later extended to New Plymouth 1278 AM, Christchurch 540 AM, Dunedin 1377 AM, Te Anau 88.0 FM, and an independently-owned low-power FM station in Tokoroa. The station was also streamed over the Internet.
In December 2012, chief executive John Fabran left the organisation and Mike Brewer, former general manager of Fairfax New Zealand's Taranaki Newspapers company became chief executive. Under his leadership, RBG was rebranded as Rhema Media in February 2014. Short, UCB's president, stepped aside from RBG and UCB in March 2013.

== Services ==

=== Radio ===
Rhema Media operates three nationwide radio networks:
Rhema, a evangelical Christian contemporary music radio network that takes its name from the biblical word rhema.
Life FM, a contemporary Christian music youth-oriented radio network.
Star, a contemporary Christian music network playing gospel music, hymns and classic Christian contemporary tracks, alongside biblical teachings. It was set up through a lease on spare programming time when Radio New Zealand's AM Network is not broadcasting sittings of the New Zealand Parliament, and also broadcasts on FM frequencies in smaller centres.

=== Television ===
Rhema Media's Christian television network, Shine TV, began broadcasting in December 2002. It broadcasts on Freeview Channel 25 and Sky TV channel 201, and features locally made and overseas news and current affairs, documentaries, movies, children's programmes, teaching programmes, and youth and music programmes. Some of Shine's programmes cover the international work of Christian missions, while others include personal testimony.
United Christian Broadcasters also owned a network UHF station licences used by Prime TV, but these were sold before Shine was launched. Shine began broadcasting on free-to-air on analogue in Christchurch in 2002, and expanded to Nelson on free-to-air analogue channel 44 on 11 November 2008 through a contract with local television channel Mainland TV. The channel ceased broadcasting on both frequencies on 28 April 2013, when South Island analogue television was switched off.

=== News service ===
Rhema operates a news department, and employed radio journalist Allan Lee to lead the department as news editor between 2004 and 2014. Lee previously worked for Newstalk ZB, producing radio bulletins, features and online stories for The Radio Network, Rhema and other affiliated stations. He had trained as a TV producer and director for the BBC. He went on to become head of content for Vision Radio Network, a affiliate of Rhema.
The news department has produced a range of television programmes for Shine TV under the Nzone brand. From 2004 to 2007, Shine TV produced and broadcast a conservative current affairs programme, Nzone with Tim Sisarich and Bob McCoskrie. From 2007 to 2009, this became Nzone Tonight, a daily newscast and current affairs programme with Rachel Thomas and Asher Bastion. From 2009 to 2014, this became a thirty-minute weekly television newsmagazine, with Davina William and Allan Lee, produced by former TVNZ staffer Pene Thoma. It also produces a daily Nzone News Update, produced and presented by the Shine TV staff.

=== The Word for Today ===
Rhema Media is the New Zealand publisher of The Word For Today, a free daily devotional written by Bob Gass and published around the world by the United Christian Broadcasters group. An initial print run of 3,500 copies was made in April 1994 in the United Kingdom before it was expanded to New Zealand in 1997. An estimated 3.5 million copies are distributed quarterly worldwide, with country-specific and translated versions also produced in Albania, Australia, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Caribbean, the Netherlands, Estonia, Portugal, Philippines, Nigeria, South Africa, Spain and the USA. In conjunction with The Message Trust, a Christian youth ministry based in Manchester, The Word For Today has been adapted for younger audiences with Word For You Today. The devotional began in August 2003, and has been printed in New Zealand since February 2010. An audio version is also broadcast on Life fm.

== References ==

== External links ==
Official website
Rhema official website
Life FM official website
Star official website