Chris Baryomunsi (born 9 December 1969) is a Ugandan physician, public health specialist, demographer and politician who has served as State Minister of Health for General Duties in the Cabinet of Uganda since 2015.
Baryomunsi is the elected Member of Parliament for Kinkiizi County East and a member of Uganda's ruling party, the National Resistance Movement (NRM). He was appointed as State Health Minister for General Duties on 1 March 2015, replacing Elioda Tumwesigye, who was appointed as Minister of Health.

== Early life and education ==
Chris Baryomunsi was born in Murama Village, Nyakishenyi, Rukungiri District, on 9 December 1969 to Aloysius Mpungirehe and Rosaria Kamayangi. In 1971, when Chris was two years old, his parents migrated to Kayungwe, Rugyeyo in present day Kanungu District. Chris Baryomunsi attended Kayungwe Primary School for his primary education and St. Paul's Seminary, Kabale for his O-Level and A-Level education. He was admitted to Makerere University, the largest public university in Uganda to study human medicine. In 1995, he graduated with the degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery. In 1997, he was awarded the Postgraduate Diploma in Demography and in 1998 he received the Master of Arts in Demography, all by Makerere. In 2003, he received the Postgraduate Diploma in HIV/AIDS Management, from the University of Brighton.

== Medical career ==
From 1995 until 1999, he worked as a medical officer and later as a medical trainer of the integrated management of childhood diseases. From 1999 to 2002, he worked as a Reproductive Health and HIV/AIDS Adviser for GTZ based in Fort Portal, Kabarole District, in Western Uganda. He later worked as a Programme Adviser for UNFPA between 2002 and 2006. He also worked as a part-time lecturer at the Department of Population Studies, Institute of Statistics and Applied Economics, Makerere University and at Makerere University School of Public Health, between 1998 and 2006.

== Political career ==
Chris Baryomunsi began his political career in high school, where he served as the elected Minister for Education at St. Pauls Seminary from 1988 to 1990. While at Makerere University in the early 1990s, he was the Finance Secretary for the Federation of African Medical Students Association (FAMSA), and the Secretary for Finance for Makerere University Medical Students Association (MUMSA). In 2005, he was appointed as a UNFPA HIV/AIDS Advisor for Harare. He turned down the job so that he could contest in the 2006 Ugandan parliamentary election. In 2006, he ran as the National Resistance Movement (NRM) political party candidate for the Kinkiizi County East constituency in Kanungu District and was elected to Parliament. He was also elected President of the African Parliamentarians Forum on Population and Development. While in Parliament, he served on the Social Services Committee and continues to serve on the Health and HIV/AIDS Committees to date. He also served as a Parliamentary Commissioner for NRM in the Parliament of Uganda from June 2011 to April 2014. On 1 March 2015, he was appointed as State Minister of Health for General Duties.

== Other considerations ==
He is known to be an independent thinker, who is not afraid to disagree with his party, when the party diverts "from pro-people issues". A Mukiga by ethnicity, he was born and raised in a Catholic family. His father converted to Catholicism in the early 1950s, despite having been raised in a Protestant household. He also has served or continues to serve in these capacities: (a) Vice Chairperson of HIV and AIDS Committee, in the Parliament of Uganda (b) Former Chairman Board of Directors, AIDS Information Centre (c) Technical Advisor on HIV and AIDS, United Nations Population Fund (d) Programme Advisor, United Nations Population Fund and (e) Member Parliamentary Budget Committee, Parliament of Uganda.

== Personal details ==
Chris Baryomunsi is married to Fosca Twebaze. They were married in a Catholic Church ceremony in 1999 and they have two children.

== See also ==
Cabinet of Uganda
Parliament of Uganda
Nakaseke District
National Resistance Movement

== References ==

== External links ==
Website of the Parliament of Uganda
Website of the Federation of African Medical Students' Associations: The FAMSA Network
Website of Makerere University Medical Students Association (MUMSA)