Unjalur is a panchayat town situated in Erode district in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. It is situated about 32 kilometres (20 mi) from Erode, a major railway junction in the Southern division of the Indian Railway and 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) from Kodumudi, which is well known for the 'Thrimurthy Kovil' or a temple dedicated to the divine trinity- Bramha, Vishnu and Shiva. The town is situated on the banks of the river Kaveri and connected strategically both by road and rail. Unjalur is considered by some to be an excellent spot for silent and spiritual getaways.

== Places of interest ==
nagaeswara swamy temple
The place known for its peace.the temple was constructed nearly 500 years ago by a pandiya king.this temple is now under the control of TN government.This temple is not reconstructed till now(2012).the people of the village and government decided to do this.
Sellandi amman Kovil
Near bank of River Kaveri..
Adhishtanam of Sri Seshadri Swamgal
A Sookshma-Samadhi of Sri Seshadri Swamigal of Tiruvannamalai is present at Unjalur. Also known as an 'Adishtanam', pujas and abhishekams are performed on a daily basis. The Aradhanai of Sri Seshadri Swamigal is conducted here once a year, on a grand scale that lasts for a week in the month of [Margazhi](Dec-Jan)by the Seshadri Swamigal Association, Coimbatore. The Aradhanai draws devotees from all over India.
Raghavendra Matham
A 'Brindavanam' or a place of worship dedicated to Sri Raghavendra Swami is located off the agraharam at Unjalur. The Brindhavanam has sannidhi's(sanctum-sanctorum)dedicated to Lord Shiva,Vishnu and Subrahmanya. The temple gigantic fig tree flanks visitors at its entrance.
Mariamman Temple
A temple dedicated to Mariamman,the 'Grama-Devatha' is the other temple located in the vicinity of the agraharam.A large statue of the presiding-deity-Ellai Mariamman is located adjacent to the temple, right opposite to the Adhishtanam.
River Kaveri
A unique distinction occupied by this tiny and non-descript village is its proximity to the river Kaveri.Led by a series of steps,two river-banks provide picture-perfect settings to the uninitiated visitor.A canal for irrigation runs in parallel to the river Kaveri.Agriculture is the mainstay with rice,sugarcane and turmeric being the major crops cultivated in the region.

== Demographics ==
According to the India population census 2001,the total population of Unjalur stands at 2,628,with a sex-ratio of 99.5 percent with 1,317 males and 1,311 females.The literacy percentile of Unjalur is 72.9 percent.

== Connectivity ==
Unjalur is located on the Erode-Tiruchirappalli railway line.The Tiruchirappalli-Mangalore express is one train that halts at Unjalur regularly. Other passenger and fast-passenger trains stop at this station. However, all major express trains (barring a few such as the Jan-Shatabdhi express) stop at Kodumudi(6 km from Unjalur), which is the next station on the same line. All express trains make a brief stopover at Unjalur during the seven-day period of the Sri Seshadhri Swami's Aradhanai.
Unjalur can be reached by road conveniently. It is 30 km from Erode and 6 km from Kodumudi on SH-84. One can also detour at Velayudhampalayam on the Salem-Karur stretch of NH-7 and travel till the Noyyal-intersection on SH-84 to reach Unjalur.
Nearest airports are at Tiruchirappalli(112 km) and Coimbatore(132 km) that also serve as international airports.

== References and external links ==
1.^ "Census of India 2001: Data from the 2001 Census, including cities, villages and towns (Provisional)". Census Commission of India. Archived from the original on 2004-06-16. http://web.archive.org/web/20040616075334/http://www.censusindia.net/results/town.php?stad=A&state5=999.
2.^"List of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies". Tamil Nadu. Election Commission of India. http://archive.eci.gov.in/se2001/background/S22/TN_ACPC.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.