Hafizabad (Punjabi/Urdu:   ) is a city and tehsil of Hafizabad District in the Punjab province of Pakistan.

== Ancient history ==
Hafizabad is an old city. In 327 BC, during Alexander's invasion of Punjab, the territory of the Sandal Bar (where Hafizabad is now located) was reported to be a well populated area. Large cities were located in this territory, and a lot of sub states were organised here under the presidency of maharajas and rajas.
In the 6th century, Hafizabad was visited by the famous Chinese traveller Xuanzang. He moved to Sangla and stayed one night in a town, then called Jaipura, which was located near the village of Koriala.

== Medieval history ==
From the beginning of the 7th century Rajput kingdoms dominated Eastern portions of Pakistan and northern India. In 997 CE, Sultan Mahmud Ghaznavi, took over the Ghaznavid dynasty empire established by his father, Sultan Sebuktegin, In 1005 he conquered the Shahis in Kabul in 1005, and followed it by the conquests of some western Punjab region. Eastern Regions of Punjab from Multan to the Rawalpindi in north (Including region of present-day Hafizabad) remained under Rajput rule until 1193. The Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire later ruled the region. The Punjab region became predominately Muslim due to missionary Sufi saints whose dargahs dot the landscape of Punjab region. During the Delhi Sultanate period a big city was situated at the site of the present village of Mehdiabad. But afterwards this territory became unpopulated and jungle-like because of shortage of water and Afghan incursions. This situation persisted until Mughal Emperor Akbar's period. Hafizabad was formerly a place of some importance, and is mentioned in the Ain-i-Akbari as headquarters of a Mahal. Hafiz, the founder, was a favourite of emperor Mughal Emperor Akbar.
Chaudry Jahangir Ahmad Baoora. Ch.J.A Baoora is x President of ISF HFD.

=== Legend of Emperor Akbar ===
According to one legend, Mughal Emperor Akbar came to the present-day site of Hafizabad on a hunting trip. The King lost his company as he was busy hunting. This territory was a jungle-like area and there was nothing to eat or drink. Akbar felt thirsty and needed to drink some water. Suddenly he was astonished to see a smoke. He followed the smoke and found a cottage, and in the cottage there was a man named Sarmast, a Muslim Sufi. Akbar told him about his thirst and asked for some water. Sarmast had no water, but he called up a grazing deer and milked it to serve Akbar with milk. Akbar drank the milk and told the Sarmast that he was a king and said, "Please ask me for anything you want. I will give you whatever you want." Faqir Sarmast asked him to build a town for his pupils. The Mughal Emperor Akbar promised and ordered the current Hakim, named Hafiz Meerak, to construct a city there.
Hafiz Meerak did as the Mughal Emperor Akbar ordered. The town, Hafizabad, took its name from his name. One source says that Akbar wanted to name the town Akbarabad, but the name Hafizabad became popular until Akbar knew about its creation. Akbar let the city retain its name, Hafizabad. Historians think that this city came into being between 1556  1570.
In the reign of Sher Shah Suri, Hafziabad was ruled by Pathan Arbab tribe. In the starting period of Hamayun and Akbhar Hafizabad was ruled by Bulhar Jaat tribe. During the Akhbar period, Bhatti, Hajra, Samrah and Kapoor, Khatri tribes were in charge of Hafizabad.
In Period of Aurangzeb Alamgir Lachi Raam Kapoor was mansabdar of Hafizabad. Two khatri tribes Kapoor and Chopras were considered as head of Hafizabad. After the death of Aurangzeb Alamgir, whole Punjab was in state of chaos. Attackers attacked Punjab from the north and local people started fighting too. Sikhs took advantage and came into power. Fights started between Sukar Chakiya Sikh Misal (who belonged to Gujranwala) and Chattas. Grandfather of Mahraja Ranjeet Singh (Sardar Charat Singh) and father of Ranjeet singh (Mahaan Singh) won. They defeated Sikhs of Bhangi Misal too. Ranjeet Singh ruled from 1801-1807 and then gave power to people of his own choice. Kapoor and Chopras were at the top of the list. During this time Dewan Sawan Mal, who later became ruler of province Multan, was administrator (kaardar) of Hafizabad. He was a very nice person. Shepherds of Hafizabad were motivated towards cultivation by him. He dug new wells for water supply here. He motivated Aroras, khatris, Bukseenke, kharals and many other jaat tribes towards cultivation and gave them land too.

== Independence ==
The predominantly Muslim population supported Muslim League and Pakistan Movement. After the independence of Pakistan in 1947, the minority Hindus and Sikhs migrated to India while Muslim refugees from India settled in the Hafizabad. Most of the refugees have since settled and inter-married into the local population.

== Geography ==
Latitude of Hafizabad: 32,0667 (3240.120N)
Longitude: 73,6833 (734059.880E)
Altitude: 207 m
Population 2012: (398922)(city population)
Hafizabad is 30 miles (48 km) away in the west from Gujranwala. Connection with the city is by Gujranwala Road or Hafizabad Road. On the Wazirabad  Faisalabad Railway Section, Hafizabad is the eighth railway station. The distance to the city of Wazirabad is 37 miles (60 km). Basically it is an agricultural city. Since the construction of an interchange near Sukheke Mandi, Hafizabad is now just 22 kilometres away from the M2 motorway.

=== Climate ===
The district climate is hot during summer and during winter is cold. The Eastern has proximity of rain fall than western part. The monsoon season is from July to September. Fertile soil allow the cultivation of high quality rices. The average per month rainfall is between 5075 millimeters.

=== Rivers ===
The Chenab River originates in the snow-covered central range of the Himalayas. It receives numerous smaller streams from the lower hills which depend upon rainfall. It breaks out from a rocky gorge in the hills, six miles (10 km) to the north of Bajwat District.
Sialkot flows downward from Marala Headwork and enters Hafizabad District near Kot Kkamer, a village of Hafizabad Tehsil. It forms a natural boundary between Mandi Bahauddin and Hafizabad districts. An other very famous place is Head Sagar Complex in which an Irrigation Canal is passing over a link canal. It is a very common and interesting place for new visitors in Hafizabad.

== Industry ==
Major portion of the country's rice exports are from Hafizabad, which is sometimes referred to as the Land of Rice or City of Rice. Cotton power loom (weaving) is the second largest industry of Hafizabad. It is linked directly with the cotton market in Faisalabad and businessmen from Faisalabad deal directly with the cotton industry in Hafizabad. It plays an important role in the development of Hafizabad. This industry has been badly affected by the energy crisis.
Before the independence of Pakistan in 1947, the per-annum income of Hafizabad just from rice was 15 million. Peshwar, Agra, Mithra, Calcutta, Karachi, and Sukker were Hafizabad's main clients. Up to 23 rice mills were there until the independence of Pakistan. Shahzad Ahmad Cheema & Company.Kasoke Road Hafizabad(+923466521657)

== Agriculture ==
The following types of rice are cultivated in Hafizabad: Basmati 385, Basmati 386, Super Karnal, 1121 Sella, Ery Nine, Erey Six, Super Fan, and KS 282. White Pearl Rice is a famous rice brand of Hafizabad. Hafizabad and Jalalpur Bhattian grain market are considered to be the biggest grain rice export centres of the country.

== Livestock ==

Hafizabad richly diversified district in livestock population. According to last Cattle Sensus there are 57321 Buffaloes, 210033 Cattle, 25112 Sheep, 122215 Goats, 2885 Horses, 47197 Asses, 2806 Mules, 346 Camel and 456865 Domestic Ppoultry.
There are Two Artificial Insemination Centers one at Tehseel Hafizabad and the other at Tehseel Pindi Bhtian. There are six working Civil Veterinary Hospitals at Hafizabad, Pindi Bhatin, Jallpur Bhatian, Sukheke Mandi, Vanike and Soianwala. there are nine working Civil Veterinary Dispensaris at Wachke, Kot Sarwar,Dhunni, Madhrianwala, Chk Bhatti, Thatha Khairumatmal,Kot Nakka, Wadror and Ghubrika. Besides all this there are Civil Veterinary Centers at village level.

There are two Mobile Veterinary Dispensaries at Hafizabad and Pindi Bhatian Tehseel respectively.

District Livestock Department is headed by District Office Livstock with two Deputy Livestok Officers viz Breed Improvement and Animal Health. There are Two Additional Principal Veterinary Officers, One Senior Veterinary Officer and eighteen Veterianry Officers

== Livestock Laboratory ==
There is a working Disease Investigation Laboratory headed by Assistant Disease Investigation Officer. where wide range of Diagnostic Test are done for the betterment of livstock of Hafizabad ditrict.Hafizabad.

== Diseases of Livestock ==

Most prevalent cattle diseases are Theileriosis, Hemorrhagic Septicemia, Foot & Mouth Disease, Babesiasis, Gall Sickness and Mastitis. In poultry most common disease is New Castle Disease and Gumboro.

== Saints Of District Hafizabad ==
Hazrat Shah Sharmast Jilal U Din Bukhari: His mausoleum is located in east of Hafizabad. The Mughal emperor Akbar and Jahangir visited him.
Hazrat Hafiz Syed Mustafa: He is a saint of Mughal era and each year on 24 of Har month the religious festival organised by the natives.
Shah Buban Bukhari: He is known as Baban Bukhari. There is one mosque within premises of his tomb named as Chah Bukhari.
Marwan Shah: He was born in 11th Hijri in the village of Jogi Jamkay. After demise of his father during early childhood he opted for profession of labouring. It is famous and known that during Shab e barat when he was watering the fields of his master the water became milk.
Syed Niamat Ali Shah: Noor Shah Sadar-u- Din was his father and Wali Qutab Imam of Begum Kot Lahore his brother. He came to Jalalpur for preaching Islam. He lived in the district and died at the age of 90. He is buried in Jalalpur and every year his urs is arranged on 15 Har(A month of Bikrami year)
Makhdoom Pir Syed Naubahaar Shah Bukhari: He was born in 1876 and died in 1978. He is the descendant of Syed Hazrat Jalaluddin Surkh Posh Bukhari(RA), Uch Sharif and his grandson Sajjada Nasheen Darbar-e-Jalalia, Makhdoom Jalaluddin also knowm as Hazrat Makhdoom Jahanian Jahan Gasht. His mausoleum is located at the border of district Hafizabad, 18 km on M3 from Pindi Bhattian to Faisalabad. His Urs is arranged on 26 & 27 Jaith(A month of Bikrami year)
Sheikh Mosa Dud: He was contemporary and devotees of Baba Fareed Gunj Shaker. It is stated that when once Hazrat Baba Fareed Gunjh Shaker was going for pilgrimage, he asked Sheikh Mosa Dud to come along with him but he apologised. When Hazrat Baba Fareed reached Macca he saw that Mosa Dud was already there. That's' why the devotees of Fareed Shaker Gunj called him Mosa Dud. He is buried in Mehmood Pur, a slum of Jalalpur.
Sai Abdullah Qadri: Kassoki Road, Hafizabad(Near Masjid Sobedaar wali)

=== Sports ===
Hafizabad is very famous in sports.The most famous game in the city is horse tent pegging. The best riders of the district are Malik Muhammad Akram Awan of Kot Hassan Khan and his nephew Malik Jahagir Maqbool Awan and Malik Rashid Awan a young rider and a Kabadi Player.Volleyball players: Rai Noor Muhammad Kharal (known as Noori) from Thatha Hashmat and Tariq Iqbal From Kotishaq are famous players of volleyball shooting and cricket (Prince Abbas Alvi), hockey (Muhammad Javed Olympian 1999), kabaddi: from Kot Hassan Khan (Muhammad Shfiq Awan Hafizabadi, a very young and talented kabaddi player from Punjab)etc.SOCCER(FOOTBALL): Sikandar Hayat from Kot Ishaq is one of the renowned footballers of the District, whose famous single goal made it possible for M.H.Sufi Foundation school to win Division Championship for the first time. He is the only player from the district of Hafizabad who got training from German coach Mr Hoggler in a camp which was organised by Pakistan Football Federation. Mr. KHALID Goraya from Venike Tarar is well known for his football coaching.

== Education ==
Over a period of time many new schools and colleges have been established in the district and the overall education standard has improved. A great educationist and social worker has played a major role in uplifting the education standard. The largest enrolment ratio of the Punjab is in Hafizabad and Rawalpindi. Literacy rate is 64% in males and 44% among females.

=== Colleges ===
Punjab College, Hafizabad . The Readers' College Hafizabad, Causeway College Hafizabad for Boys & Girls Farabi Law College Affiliated with University of the Punjab, M.H.SUFI foundation college kot ishaq, Govt. college for Boys, Now upgraded and renamed as Govt. College Hafizabad, Govt.Islamia Degree college for Women,
Lyceum Institute of Future Education (LIFE), Jalal Pur Road nearly opposite to Masjid Ahle-Hadees Hafizabad, Superior college Hafizabad, Muslim College hafizabad, Hafizabad College of Commerce, Hafizabad College of Business Studies, Grw road Hafizabad, Justice Law College Dakkhana road hafizabad, The Management Club 1st Floor Usman Plaza Fawara Chow Hafizabad. national college of computer science{heritiage} Elite Academy Ali pur road Hafizabad.Tips College Jalalpur Bhattian But there is no university in this City yet and the students face a number of difficulties in getting education from another City.

=== Schools ===
Al Raza Public Model School, Lakhia.
Fatima Jinnah Public School For Girls.
Govt. Model Higher Secondary School.
Sublime Schools System.
The Readers' School (English Medium) Jalalpur Road.
Sir Syed Scholars INN.
Unique Farooqi High School (Running under Fazal Education Academy)
Grammar Model School.
District Public School.
Misali Public School.
Abdali Public School.
Crescent Public School.
M. H. Sufi Foundation School.
Beaconhouse school system.
Brooksfield School System.
Allied School System.
Govt. Muslim High School.
Govt. High school No.1.
Govt. High School Madina Colony.
Govt. High school No.2.
Concept Model School.
Gehwara-e-Taleem English Model School.
The City school.
The Educators.
Lahore grammar school(LGS).
are playing major part to provide high education to students .

== References ==