Damien Comolli (born 13 December 1972) is a former football coach, scout and director of football. He has previously worked with AS Monaco, AS Saint-tienne, Arsenal, Tottenham Hotspur and Liverpool. He speaks fluent English, Spanish and French.

== Early life and career ==
He was born in Bziers, France, and played as a youth team player at Monaco. In 1992, he began a three-year coaching job with Monaco, where he looked after the club's Under-16 squads and won the state championship at that level. Comolli completed a law degree in 1995 and gained his French coaching licence.

== Arsenal ==
In 1996, he joined Arsenal and spent seven seasons as a European scout and is credited with the discovery of several of Arsenal's players such as Kolo Tour, Emmanuel Ebou and Gal Clichy. Between 2004 and 2005 he was technical director of AS Saint-tienne. The club went through a successful period, finishing sixth in the league and reaching the semi-finals of the Coupe de France. During his time there he also oversaw a number of important first team signings and developed partnerships with junior and amateur clubs, locally, nationally and internationally.

== Tottenham Hotspur ==
In 2005, he became director of football at Tottenham Hotspur, with overall responsibility for the medical, academy, scouting and club secretarial departments, replacing the outgoing Frank Arnesen. During his time there he had several disagreements with coach Martin Jol, who, after his departure from Spurs, complained several players had been signed by Comolli without his agreement and that they had left the squad "unbalanced".
He spent three years in the job but with Tottenham performing poorly in 200809 and some of Comolli's signings coming in for criticism, he was dismissed in October 2008, shortly after the dismissals of manager Juande Ramos, assistant Gus Poyet and first team coach Marcos lvarez, as the Director of Football position was abolished at the insistence of incoming manager Harry Redknapp. During his time at Tottenham, Comolli was responsible for Tottenham's policy of signing young talents, bringing players such as Gareth Bale, Alan Hutton, Kevin-Prince Boateng, Giovani dos Santos, Adel Taarabt and Youns Kaboul to the club. Comolli was also responsible for the signings of former and current Tottenham first-team squad members Luka Modri, Benot Assou-Ekotto, Heurelho Gomes, David Bentley, Vedran orluka and Roman Pavlyuchenko, as well as Dimitar Berbatov.

== Saint-tienne ==
On 9 November 2008, it was announced that he would return to Saint-tienne as sporting director. His appointment led to the departure of manager Laurent Roussey. After leaving Saint-tienne for Liverpool, the club's co-chairman Bernard Caiazzo said that Comolli was responsible for causing the club's financial problem and told the News of the World:

== Liverpool ==
On 3 November 2010, his appointment as director of football strategy at Liverpool was announced, with part of his remit being to oversee the recruitment of new players to the club. Comolli made an instant impact at Liverpool as he was responsible for the signings of two players, Luis Surez and Andy Carroll, on January 2011's transfer deadline day, with Carroll's signing breaking the record for most expensive British player ever and eighth most expensive player in history, overtaking Wayne Rooney. On 22 March 2011 Comolli was appointed as the director of football at Liverpool. In an interview, Comolli stated it covers pretty much the whole football side of running the football club, although he does not get involved in team training or selection.
In the summer transfer window for the 201112 season, Comolli helped Liverpool sign Jordan Henderson, Charlie Adam, Stewart Downing, Doni, Jos Enrique, Sebastin Coates and Craig Bellamy. On 12 April 2012, Comolli left Liverpool by mutual consent. He stated that he left due to family reasons but rumours have circulated that he may have been sacked as a result of failings in the transfer market. After leaving Liverpool, Comolli spoke out defending the club's record. As of December 2012, several players that Comolli signed were no longer in the first team under manager Brendan Rodgers.

== References ==