New Tide Orquesta is a Swedish chamber music group based in Stockholm and Gothenburg. The group, consisting of Per Strby, Livet Nord, Thomas Gustavsson, Josef Kallerdahl, Peter Gran and Johanna Dahl, was known from 1996 to 2012 as New Tango Orquesta.
Their music have been used in several movies, including the award-winning Searching for Sugar Man, and as the musical score to several theatre plays, dance performances and art installations.
The band have toured and performed at concert halls, festivals, clubs and music stages in Russia, Ukraine, China, Turkey, Germany, England, Ireland, Argentina, Uruguay, Luxembourg, Denmark, Norway among others.

== Lineup ==
The group is a sextet:
Per Strby, composer, bandoneon
Livet Nord, violin
Peter Gran, electric guitar
Thomas Gustavsson, piano
Josef Kallerdahl, double bass
Johanna Dahl, cello
The artistic director of the group, composer Per Strby, is known for electro acts such as Zeigeist and Pearl Fiction. New Tide's music is a unique mix of baroque music, nuevo tango, free improvisation, minimalism, post minimalism and contemporary classical music. They are known for their special sound with lots of dynamic. In 2010, they were awarded "Group Of The Year" in the Swedish folk and world music gala.
The "New Tide Orquesta" name was first introduced in the music documentary/concert "New Tide Orquesta - The River Session", produced by Fredrik Egerstrand and Kalle Gustafsson Jerneholm for broadcast on Swedish national television (SVT) in 2012. The word "tango" was replaced with "tide" because the group felt that they had "grown out of the tango suit" and needed to develop their music without boundaries and obligations.

== Discography ==
They have released five albums as New Tango Orquesta and one as New Tide Orquesta:
1998 The New Tango Orquesta
2000 Part II
2005 Bestiario
2009 The Kiev Concert
2009 Vesper
2012 How To Climb A Mountain
The third album "Bestiario" was nominated for a Swedish Grammy award in 2005. The fourth album was recorded in the beautiful October Palace in Kiev, Ukraine in 2008. Their fifth album "Vesper" won an award for "experimental of the year" in the Swedish Manifest gala in 2011.
In 2011, they released the book "Full Scores/Photos/Text" with the complete full scores for "Vesper", text by the Swedish dramatist Mattias Brunn, art front cover by the Swedish artist Ernst Billgren and collected photos from the bands tours and performances. A sixth album "How To Climb A Mountain", their first album under the name "New Tide Orquesta", was released October 24, 2012 on HOOB Records.

== Bibliography ==
2011 Full Scores/Photos/Text

== References ==

== External links ==
New Tide Orquesta's official Website
Facebook
New Tango Orquesta's myspace
myspace fan-site