The Ldenscheider Nachrichten is a local daily newspaper for Ldenscheid and the surrounding area in the southern part of the Mrkischer Kreis, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.. It is the largest newspaper in Ldenscheid. It is published every day except Sunday, sometimes even on public holidays. It celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2004.
The Ldenscheider Nachrichten is published by Mrkischer Zeitungsverlag, which also publishes the Meinerzhagener Zeitung, the Altenaer Kreisblatt, the Allgemeine Anzeiger (Halver) and the Sderlnder Volksfreund (Werdohl). The Ldenscheider Nachrichten cooperates editorially and technically with the Sderlnder Tageblatt (Plettenberg) and the Mendener Zeitung. The total circulation of all the above, printed in Meinerzhagen, is approximately 48,000 copies.
The Ldenscheider Nachrichten is a local newspaper that takes all its regional news from the Westflische Anzeiger, which is published in Hamm and also supplies the regional news for a number of other newspapers.
The Ldenscheider Nachrichten belongs to Dirk Ippen's media group, which also includes the Mnchner Merkur, the tabloid newspaper tz (Munich), the Kreiszeitung in Syke, the Oranienburger Generalanzeiger, the Altmark-Zeitung, the Fehmarnsche Tageblatt, the Offenbach-Post in Offenbach am Main, and the Hessische/Niederschsische Allgemeine in Kassel.
The chief editor of the Ldenscheider Nachrichten is Hans Willms.

== Restructuring ==
As with many other newspapers, restructuring measures have also cost the Ldenscheider Nachrichten jobs in recent years. In 2004, the online edition and accounting were taken over by the editorial staff of the Westflischer Anzeiger in Hamm, resulting in the loss of jobs in Ldenscheid.
In 2006, the Ldenscheider Nachrichten dismissed its photo editors, the work being taken over by the editors of the respective departments or freelancers.
The companies left the Publishers' Association, and new employees are no longer paid according to collective bargaining agreements. A large part of the reporting now comes from freelancers.

== People at LN ==
Dirk Ippen, owner
Volker Griese, journalist

== External links ==
Website of the Ldenscheider Nachrichten
Main page: Westflischer Anzeiger

== See also ==
List of newspapers in Germany