Vaikuntha Ekadashi (Sanskrit:  ; Telugu:  ; Kannada:  ; Tamil:  ) (Sometimes called Mukkoti Ekadashi in Telugu) is the Shukla paksha Ekadashi that occurs during the Pausha month in the Hindu calendar (corresponding to late December - January in English calendar).
Vaishnavism (Worship of Vishnu) culture believes that Vaikuntha Dwaram or the gate to Lord's Inner Sanctum is opened on this day. The Margashirsha shukla paksha ekadashi in lunar calendar is known as a 'Mokshada Ekadashi'. Special prayers, yagnas, discourses and speeches are arranged at Vishnu temples across the world on this auspicious day.

== Legend ==
According to the Vishnu Purana, fasting on Vaikuntha Ekadashi is equivalent to fasting on the remaining 23 Ekadashis of the (Hindu) year. However according to Vaishnava tradition fasting is mandatory on all Ekadashi of both Shukla paksha and Krishna paksha. Fasting on Ekadashi is considered holier than any other religious observation.
Vishnu opened the gate of Vaikuntham (his abode) for two demons in spite of their being against him. They also asked for the boon that whoever listens to their story and sees the image of Vishnu coming out of the door (called Dwar), called Vaikunth Dwar, will reach Vaikunth as well. Temples all over India make a door kind of structure on this day for devotees to walk through.
According to Padma Purana, the female energy of Vishnu slayed the demon Muran and protects the 'Devas'. This happened on the eleventh day of lunar month during the sun's journey in the Dhanurrashi or Dhanu Rashi. Impressed by the act, Vishnu names her as 'Ekadashi' and gives her the boon that those who worship 'Ekadashi' on the day of her victory over Muran would reach 'Vaikunth' (His abode).
Vaikuntha Ekadashi is one of the important and auspicious days for Hindus. It is dedicated to Vishnu. It occurs in the Hindu calendar, in the month of Margashirsha (between December and January). When observed, it bestows liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

== Significance ==
The significance of Vaikuntha Ekadashi is mentioned in the Padma Purana. The legend says that the Devas were unable to bear the tyranny of 'Muran', a demon, approached Shiva, who directed them to Vishnu. A battle ensued between Vishnu and the demon and Vishnu realized that a new weapon was needed to slay Muran.
In order to take rest and create a new weapon, Vishnu retired to a cave named for the goddess Haimavati in Bhadrikashrama. When Muran tried to slay Vishnu, who was sleeping, the female power that emerged from Vishnu burned Muran to ashes with her glance.
Vishnu, who was pleased, named the goddess 'Ekadashi' and asked her to claim a boon. Ekadashi, instead, beseeched Vishnu that people who observed a fast on that day should be redeemed of their sins. Vishnu thus declared that people who observed a fast on that day and worshipped Ekadashi, would attain Vaikuntha. Thus came into being the first Ekadashi, which was a Dhanurmasa Shukla Paksha Ekadashi.
It is important to look at the significance of this auspicious day from the spiritual angle.
The demon Muran stands for the Rajasic and Tamasic qualities in people, attributed to lust, passion, inertia, arrogance etc. When one conquers these tendencies, one attains the purity of mind, Satva, indispensable for attaining of moksha, the liberation or realization of the self.
For realizing the self as pure awareness, purity of mind is required. Fasting helps to keep at bay tendencies which could be triggered by intake of certain foods. Keeping vigil in the night is symbolic of awareness, or being watchful of the contents of the mind. When the mind is looked at, it becomes still. To abide in the stillness is to attain freedom or peace, acquired through merging of the mind with the self. This is symbolic of the mind automatically being absorbed at the sight of Vishnu after the arduous fast and vigil.
The belief that rice is prohibited, because Muran dwells in it, symbolically signifies that the eating of rice makes one feel heavy and hampers the vigil. This signifies that entertaining negative tendencies could hamper one's progress towards awareness or consciousness.
Observance of the rituals on this auspicious day even without understanding their importance is beneficial. Hence the merit accrued through observing them with piety is believed to be immeasurable.
In the Mahabarata, Bhagavad Gita the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna at the beginning of Kurukshetra War is said to have occurred on this day.

== Fasting on Ekadashi ==
Vaikuntha Ekadashi fasting is an important aspect of those associated with it. People fast the whole day and keep vigil. Special prayers are offered to Vishnu and devotees engage in Japa (chanting of Vishnu's name) and Dhyana (Meditation). On 'Dashami', the previous day of the observance, devotees who take up Vaikuntha Ekadashi fasting are to take only lunch. On Ekadashi, the next day, they have to maintain a complete fast and engage in prayers and meditation of Vishnu. They are strictly prohibited from taking rice. That night, people keep vigil the whole night and visit the temple of Vishnu, mostly in the wee hours of the morning.
On this day, the Vaikuntha Dwaram or the Vaikuntha Vaasal, 'The Gates of Heaven' are believed to be kept open. The area encircling the sanctum is referred to Vaikuntha Vaasal and devotees throng to gain entry into the temple, to seek Vishnu.

== Celebrations ==

=== Sri Rangam ===
Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple, Srirangam Vaikuntha Ekadashi celebrations in Srirangam last 21 days, divided into two parts: pagal pathu (morning part) and Ira pathu (night part). [Vishnu as Lord Ranganatha is adorned by an armor of diamonds (rathnaangi) and brought to the Thousand-Pillared Hall from the sanctum sanctorum through the northern gate known as Paramapada Vasal, the gate to Vaikuntha. This gate is opened once in a year, only on the Vaikuntha Ekadashi day. It is said that any one who goes through the Paramapada Vasal will reach vaikuntham.

=== Tirupati ===
Tirumala Venkateswara Temple also has a similar concept. Thirumala has a special entrance called Vaikuntha Dwaram that encircles the sanctum sanctorum. The dwaram (passage) is opened only on Vaikuntha Ekadashi and it is believed that any person who passes through this `Vaikuntha Dwaram' on this particular day attains salvation. The temple witnesses heavy inflow of pilgrims and dignitaries for Vaikuntha Ekadashi.

=== Mannargudi ===
Rajagopalaswamy Temple, Mannargudi also has a same concept with pagal pathu (morning part) and Ira pathu (night part). Special Entrance has been called as "Sorga Vasal". That entrance will be opened by the temple elephant in the early morning on Vaikuntha Ekadashi Day.

=== Mahalakshmi Temple, Gubbi ===
Mahalakshmi Temple, Gubbi follows several traditions with eagerness. Every Tuesday and Friday poojas are performed at the temple in an elaborate manner . Vaikunta Ekadasi is an important festival dedicated to Bhagvan Srihari Vishnu , The Temple has a special entrance called Vaikuntha Dwara or the gate to the heaven , devotees queue up to pass through the Gate of Vaikunta

== References ==

== See also ==
Divya Desams

== External links ==
Srirangam Vaikunta Ekadasi Festival program 26.12.2011-15.1.2012
Significance of Vaikunata Ekadasi
Vaikunta Ekadasi in Srirangam
Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple - Official Website
Vaikunta Ekadasi Festival Live Webcast from Sri Ranganathar Temple, Sri Rangam
Mannargudi
Sri Rajagopalaswamy Temple Mannargudi