Daniel Marx (b. April 16 1953, Paysand, Uruguay) is the former Secretary of Finance of Argentina and he is currently Executive Director of Quantum Finanzas, a financial services firm in Argentina and the region which is part of a global network led by Evercore Partners (US, Mexico and UK) and g5Advisors (Brazil). He is also a consultant and advisor for multiple multilateral institutions such as International Development Bank (IDB) and Inter-American Investment Corporation (IIC), Latin American governments, major private and public corporations and investments funds. He is a founding Board member of the Consejo Directivo del Centro para la Estabilidad Financiera (CEF) and also professor of International Finance at the Universidad de San Andrs. Previously, he was an Executive Director of MBA Banco de Inversiones, Managing Director of Darby Overseas Investments, Independent Director of Templeton Funds, Head Division of Banco Ro de la Plata and was in charge of the Treasury and Planning Departments of Banco Tornquist, among others. He has given seminars on Emerging Markets and Corporate and International Finance in graduate programs at Yale University, Duke Universitys Fuqua School of Business and others. He also gave courses and participated in seminars at the Universidad Catlica Argentina (UCA), ITBA (Instituto Tecnolgico Buenos Aires) and EDDE. He participated as a panelist and presenter in numerous panels of topics such as Global Imbalances, topics of the International Financial Architecture, Sovereign and Corporate Debt Workouts and Financing Alternatives. He also has a side interest in combinatorics, including hypergraph complexity measures.

== Public sector activities ==
Between 1988 and 1993 he was Special Financial Representative and Assistant Secretary in the Ministry of the Economy of Argentina coordinating Debt Negotiations, which encompassed regularizing sovereign debt and opening access to credit for the country. Previously, he was a Board Member of Banco Central de la Repblica Argentina for the Republic of Argentina. Later, he was Secretary of Finance in charge of Financing and Financial Services during particularly difficult times in Argentina (19992001).

== Other activities ==
Daniel supported the La Juanita Cooperative in La Matanza -a poor district of Buenos Aires- where he helped in the development of a business plan for the 2006 land 2007 Christmas and other campaigns. He advised Fundacin Compromiso (2002-6) which provides technical assistance to NGOs. He also participated in initiatives devoted to marginalized segments of population with particular emphasis in reinforcing education. Daniel was awarded Global Leader for Tomorrow by the World Economic Forum. He also became a member of Counsel for CARI (Consejo Argentino para las Relaciones Internacionales). In addition, he attended the conference ICALP 2011, held in Zurich, Switzerland. Two years later, in 2013, he was invited speaker at this conference, ICALP.

== Publications ==
He published numerous articles in specialized books, magazines and newspapers, for instance:
Sovereign Debt and the Debt Crisis in Emerging Countries en Sovereign Debt at the Crossroads, compiled by Chis Jochnick and Fraser A. Preston, Oxford University Press, 2006
Anlisis de la situacin de deuda de compaas en Argentina, en Acuerdo Preventivo Extrajudicial, compiled by Hector Alegra, La Ley, 2004
Restructuracin de la deuda soberana: El caso prximo de Argentina, Default y Reestructuracin de la Deuda Externa, compiled by Douglas R. Elespe, La Ley, 2003
Collaboration in Presidencialismo absoluto, of authors Ricardo Ferraro and Luis Rappoport, El Ateneo, 2008

== External links ==
Universidad de Buenos Aires
Quantum Finanzas
Evercore Partners
G5 Advisors
Centro para la Estabilidad Financiera (CEF)
Universidad de San Andrs
Universidad Catlica Argentina
Instituto Tecnolgico Buenos Aires (ITBA)
Banco Central de la Repblica Argentina
Cooperativa Barrio La Juanita
Fundacin Compromiso