Tinamus is a genus of birds in the tinamou family. This genus comprises some of the larger members of this South American family.
The species in taxonomic order are:
Tinamus guttatus white-throated tinamou located in southeastern Colombia, southern Venezuela, Amazonian Brazil, and northern Bolivia
Tinamus tao grey tinamou located in northern and western Brazil, eastern Ecuador, eastern Peru, northern Bolivia, Colombia east of the Andes, northwestern and northeastern Venezuela, and northwestern GuyanaTinamus tao larensis located in central Colombia and northwestern Venezuela
Tinamus tao kleei located in south-central Colombia, eastern Ecuador, eastern Peru, eastern Bolivia, and western Brazil
Tinamus tao septentrionalis located in northeastern Venezuela and northwestern Guyana
Tinamus tao tao located in north-central Brazil, far eastern Peru, and far northwestern Bolivia

Tinamus solitarius solitary tinamou located in northeastern Argentina (Misiones), eastern Paraguay, eastern Brazil
Tinamus osgoodi black tinamou located in two small areas: the Andes of southeastern Peru and the Andes of ColombiaTinamus osgoodi osgoodi located in southeastern Peru
Tinamus osgoodi hershkovitzi located in parts of Colombia

Tinamus major great tinamou located from southeastern Mexico through Panama, excluding Honduras and from Ecuador to French Guiana parts of Brazil and northern Bolivia,Tinamus major percautus located in southeastern Mexico, Belize, and northern Guatemala
Tinamus major robustus located in southeastern Mexico, Guatemala, and northern Nicaragua
Tinamus major fuscipennis located in northern Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and western Panama
Tinamus major castaneiceps located in southwestern Costa Rica and western Panama
Tinamus major brunniventris located in south central Panama
Tinamus major saturatus located in eastern Panama and northwestern Colombia
Tinamus major latifrons located in southwestern Colombia and western Ecuador
Tinamus major zuliensis located in northeastern Colombia and northwestern Venezuela
Tinamus major major located in eastern Venezuela and Guyana
Tinamus major olivascens located in Amazon Brazil
Tinamus major peruvians located in southeastern Colombia, eastern Ecuador, eastern Bolivia, western Brazil, and eastern Peru
Tinamus major serratus located in southern Venezuela and northwestern Brazil

== Etymology ==
Tinamus comes from the Galibi tribe and it is what they call the Tinamous.

== Footnotes ==

== References ==
Brands, Sheila (Aug 14, 2008). "Systema Naturae 2000 / Classification, Genus Tinamus". Project: The Taxonomicon. Retrieved Feb 4, 2009. 
Clements, James (2007). The Clements Checklist of the Birds of the World (6 ed.). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-4501-9. 
Gotch, A. F. (1995) [1979]. "Tinamous". Latin Names Explained. A Guide to the Scientific Classifications of Reptiles, Birds & Mammals. New York, NY: Facts on File. p. 182. ISBN 0-8160-3377-3. 
ITIS