Bhalswa Horseshoe Lake, or Bhalswa Jheel, is a lake in northwest Delhi, India. It was originally shaped like a horseshoe. However, over the years half of it was used as a landfill area. Now a low income housing colony, an extension of the nearby town of Bhalswa Jahangir Pur has been built on it, destroying the once excellent wetland ecosystem and wildlife habitat of the region which once played host to scores of local and migratory wildlife species, especially waterbirds, including waterfowl, storks and cranes.
This horseshoe lake was originally formed when the nearby River Yamuna left behind one of its meandering loops here when it changed course over the years and is now channelled through more defined and fortified embankments and dykes to defend modern Delhi from floods.
On the west side of the lake on the landfill-reclaimed land stands a housing colony. On the east side is a plantation of a few acres of acacia, babool and keekar trees, offering some habitat to local remnant wildlife.
Though the lake and its surrounding fields were originally an excellent wetland ecosystem which supported a rich wildlife habitat, the Delhi government of late has converted the lake and started promoting it as a water games/sports facility.
There is another horseshoe-shaped lake, Ansupa Lake near Saranda hills, situated 100 km west of cuttack district in Orissa, having a length of 16 km.

== See also ==
Bhalswa Jahangir Pur colony / town, Delhi
River Yamuna
Najafgarh lake, Delhi
Najafgarh drain, Delhi
Najafgarh drain bird sanctuary, Delhi
National Zoological Park Delhi
Sultanpur National Park, bordering Delhi in adjoining Gurgaon District, Haryana
Okhla Sanctuary, bordering Delhi in adjoining Uttar Pradesh

== References ==

How green was my city: eco-tourism on wheels shows impact of pollution, New Delhi, Dec 14 2008, Express News Service, Indian Express Newspaper
Bhalaswa: once there was a lake by Neha Sinha : New Delhi, Tue Aug 11 2009.

== External links ==
Groundwater levels improve in the Capital (Archived from the original on December 28, 2010)
Wateraid.org
Flowers, gardens to cover Delhi's sanitary landfill