"Caesar and Me" is episode 148 of the American television anthology series The Twilight Zone starring Jackie Cooper as a ventriloquist. It is not to be confused with a similar episode starring Cliff Robertson as a ventriloquist, The Dummy.

== Plot ==
Jonathan West (Jackie Cooper) is an unsuccessful Irish ventriloquist. He is perpetually broke, selling valuable keepsakes like his grandfather's watch to pawn brokers in exchange for petty cash. At the boarding house where he lives, he is mercilessly taunted by a little girl, Susan (Morgan Brittany, billed as Suzanne Cupito), for failing to find a job. But unbeknownst to everyone, Jonathan's evil ventriloquist dummy, "Little Caesar", has a mind of his own and talks to him at will. Despite Jonathan's reassurances that they are on the verge of a big break, Caesar apathetically tells him that they've hit bottom.
When Jonathan and Caesar go to a nightclub for an audition, the performance is poorly received. The following day, Jonathan is unable to find employment because his lack of vocational experience and immigrant status; he may soon leave the boarding house because he is behind on his rent. Caesar berates Jonathan for being a hopeless "clod", but has a solution to his money woes: burglary. A reluctant Jonathandirected by Caesar in his suitcasebreaks into a delicatessen and steals its money. Jonathan uses it to pay his rent, but Caesar, during a conversation overheard by Susan, pressures him into committing more burglaries.
Susannow aware that Caesar can talksneaks into Jonathan's room in his absence to unsuccessfully speak with the dummy. Jonathan catches her coming out of the room and runs her off. Inside, Jonathan expresses a desire to flee, but Caesar cajoles him into carrying out the next burglary. The duo sneaks into the nightclub to break into the manager's office. However, they are caught by a night watchman after they steal money from the nightclub's safe. They manage to bluff their way past him by giving an impromptu routine.
When Jonathan and Caesar arrive home, Susan eavesdrops on their ensuing argument. The next morning over breakfast, Susan hears her aunt, Mrs. Cudahy, read about the nightclub theft from a newspaper. She calls the police to tip them off about Jonathan and Caesar. Two detectives arrive at the boarding house and interrogate Jonathan, who tries to make Caesar talk about his role in the crime. The dummy, however, remains silent. Mrs. Cudahy and the detectives stare at the one-sided exchange, thinking Jonathan mad. Jonathan now realizes that Caesar has abandoned him, and is willingly arrested.
After the detectives lead Jonathan out of the room, Caesar turns his head around and addresses Susan. He says that he likes her for her "hip attitude" and offers to help her run away to New York. Caesar assures Susan that Jonathan will now be gone "for a long, long time" and that the two of them are now "a team". Finally, Caesar implies that Susan should kill Mrs. Cudahy with poison darts.

== Adele Strassfield ==
The writer of the episode, Adele Strassfield, was the secretary of William Froug, the producer of the second half of the final season of The Twilight Zone. According to Froug, they worked out this episode together. Strassfield (billed in the credits as "Adele T. Strassfield", not "A.T. Strassfield" per Zicree) is the only woman credited with writing an original teleplay for the original version of The Twilight Zone, though several women received credit for stories that were adapted for the show. She later wrote a first season episode of Gilligan's Island with executive producer Froug's assistance.

== Production notes ==
The dummy used in this episode to portray "Caesar" was originally created in the 1940s by puppetmaker Revello Petee. The same dummy was used one year earlier in the 1963 Twilight Zone episode, "The Dummy." The actual original dummy which was used in both episodes had been housed in a private collection in Connecticut since the late 1970s, but now resides in David Copperfield's International Museum and Library of the Conjuring Arts in Las Vegas, NV.
A figure of the puppet (as he was seen in the earlier episode, "The Dummy") can be seen at Disney's Hollywood Studios in the dark corner of a barred off exhibit to the side of one of the elevator exits of the Twilight Zone Tower of Terror ride.

== See also ==
The Great Gabbo, a 1929 film about a mad ventriloquist, starring Erich von Stroheim
Dead of Night, a 1944 anthology film featuring a mad ventriloquist segment
The Dummy, a 1962 episode of The Twilight Zone television series, starring Cliff Robertson
Magic, a 1978 film starring Anthony Hopkins and Ann-Margret about a ventriloquist whose delusion leads him to commit murders at what he imagines to be the behest of his dummy, "Fats"
Slappy the Dummy, a recurring novel and film character with a similar appearance to Caesar

== References ==
DeVoe, Bill. (2008). Trivia from The Twilight Zone. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. ISBN 978-1-59393-136-0
Grams, Martin. (2008). The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9703310-9-0
Zicree, Marc Scott: The Twilight Zone Companion. Sillman-James Press, 1982 (second edition)

== External links ==
"Caesar and Me" at the Internet Movie Database
TV.com episode page