Chulalongkorn University (Thai: ; rtgs: Chulalongkon Mahawitthayalai; pronounced m.h.wt.t.j.lj), officially abbreviated as CU and commonly abbreviated as Chula (Thai: ), is the oldest university under the Thai modern educational system, founded in 1917 by King Vajiravudh (Rama VI) who named it after his father, King Chulalongkorn (Rama V). It is one of the best universities in Thailand and Southeast Asia according to several university rankings. It comprises nineteen faculties and institutes.

Its campus occupies a vast area in downtown Bangkok. Diplomas were traditionally handed out at graduation by the King of Thailand, created and begun by King Prajadhipok (Rama VII). But at present, King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX) delegates the role to one of his daughters, Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn.

== History ==

The demands of officials specialized in various fields by the government in the late 19th century Siam was an result of King Chulalongkorns bureaucratic reforms, which aimed to transform the feudal Thai society into a modernized state. In 1899, the king founded the Civil Service Training School near the northern gate of the Royal Palace. Those who graduated from the school would become royal pages. Being royal pages, they learned how to administer organizations by working closely with the king, which was a traditional way of entrance to Siamese bureaucracy. After being royal pages, they would then serve in the Mahattai Ministry or other government ministries.
On April 1, 1902 the king thought the name of the school should be renamed to increase dignity of students and graduates. Hence the name Royal Pages School (Thai: ) was later used. Later, on January 1, 1911, King Vajiravudh renamed the school again to Civil Service College of King Chulalongkorn (Thai: ) as a memorial to his father and moved the school to Windsor Palace (Thai:  ) in the Pathumwan district.
The academic demands, however, increased all over the country as a whole as Siam was modernized. King Vajiravudh then took the remaining funds of Chulalongkorns Royal Equestrian Statue construction, which was collected from people. Then combined with his own funds to subsidize the construction of a university campus. The king organized various schools around the city proper into the Chulalongkorn's College. The college offered 8 majors taught by 5 schools including;
School of International Relations in the Royal Palace
School of Teacher Training at Baan Somdet Chao Phraya
Royal Medical College at Siriraj Hospital
School of Legal Studies
School of Mechanical Sciences at the Windsor Palace
King Rama VI then realized that the education should be provided to all people not only for the bureaucrats. On March 26, 1917, the college was upgraded to the Chulalongkorn University (Thai: ), and the schools were transformed into four faculties: Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Faculty of Public Administration, Faculty of Engineering, and Faculty of Medicine.

The university firstly granted certificates to its graduates. The education for a degree was then prepared. The Rockefeller Foundation reorganized the curriculum of the Faculty of Medicine. In 1923, the Faculty of Medicine became the first faculty to accept students from the secondary education (known as Mattayom). The remaining faculties then followed suit. After the 1932 Revolution, the Khana Ratsadon wanted the legal and political studies to be independent from "royalists'" Chulalongkorn University so they took the Faculty of Law and Political Science into their new Thammasat University in 1933.
In 1938, the Chulalongkorn Universitys Preparatory School was founded to provide pre-collegiate education for its students. Those who managed to enter the university had to spent two years in the Preparatory School before going on to the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The Preparatory School, however, ceased to be a university-owned preparatory school in 1947 and became independent Triam Udom Suksa School. Later, the university established Chulalongkorn University Demonstration School (CUD) system as laboratory primary and high schools for Faculty of Education.

== Organization ==

Chulalongkorn University consists of 19 faculties, 3 colleges, 1 school and many institutes which function as a teaching and researching unit.
In 1917, the university had four faculties: Arts and Sciences, Public Administration, Engineering and Medicine. The Faculty of Law was established in 1933 as part of the Faculty of Law and Political Science. During the 1930s to the 1950s it expanded to various fields including Pharmacy (1934), Veterinary Science (1935), Architecture (1939), Dentistry (1940), and Commerce and Accountancy (1943). In 1943, the regency government under General Phibun separated the Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry, Pharmacy, and Veterinary Science to become the University of Medical Sciences (now Mahidol University). In 1948, the Faculty of Political Science was re-established. The Faculty of Education was established in 1957 from the School of Teacher Training at Baan Somdet Chao Phraya (Thai:  ). In 1967, the Faculty of Veterinary Science was returned from Kasetsart University and the Faculty of Medicine at Chulalongkorn Hospital was moved from University of Medical Sciences to Chulalongkorn University. In 1972, the Faculty of Dentistry and Faculty of Pharmacy were retrieved.
Office of Commission on Agricultural Resource Education (OCARE) was established in 2009. It is actually not administration office but school in which teaching and research are carried out. It intakes students from two groups: one from Northern Thailand provinces (Nan, Phayao, Phrae, Uttaradit) and another from the rest of country. It has been upgraded into School of Agricultural Resources with full degree-granting power by university council on 5 March 2014.
List of faculties and institutes

== Rankings ==
In the QS Top Universities ranking, Chulalongkorn was ranked 243 in "World University Rankings 2014/15" and 53 in "Asian University Rankings 2015/16".
The university suffered a drop in academic reputation in the Times Asia University Rankings 2014, and fell out of the top 100 universities in Asia, losing ground to King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi (number 50) and Mahidol University (number 82).

== Honorary Degrees ==
The University has given honorary degrees to heads of state and other international dignitaries, including two US Presidents:
Lyndon B. Johnson, October 29, 1966
Bill Clinton, November 26, 1996
Nelson Mandela, July 17, 1997

== Traditions ==
Chulalongkorn University student traditions include:
ChulaThammasat Traditional Football Match: The annual football match between Chulalongkorn University and Thammasat University in January at Suphashalasai Stadium. It first started in 1934.
Loy Krathong: an annual celebration of the full moon night, which usually falls on the first full moon day in November. Since the festival is open to the public, it attracts many people, especially Chulalongkorn students and faculty and those who live in downtown Bangkok, to come to the university to float their Krathongs on the university's pond.
Chulalongkorn Academic Exhibition: a triennial academic and research exhibition presented by Chulalongkorn University's students and faculty. It is regarded as one of the most important academic fairs in Thailand.

== Student activities and clubs ==

The University is host to 40 student clubs, including the Buddhism and Tradition Club, the Religious Studies Club, the Mind Study Club, and the Thai Classical Music Club. Chulalongkorn also have a Morals Network, which actively campaigns to protect student activities from damaging the university's reputation. The University's Cheer Club annually organizes the Chula-Thammasat traditional football match.

== Symbols ==

=== Phra Kiao ===

Since the establishment of the Royal Pages School, the former name of the university, Chulalongkorn authorized the use of his personal emblem as school emblem. The emblem is 'Phra Kiao', or Thai style coronet which is made to fit hair topknot. As the school was transformed into university, the King of Thailand authorized the use of Phra Kiao until nowadays. Today, Phra Kiao is used in formal letters, transcripts, souvenirs made by university and student uniforms.

=== Student Uniform ===
Undergraduate students are required to wear uniform as they are studying, taking examinations and contacting the university. For graduate students, collared or polo shirt and dark trousers are required for male students while plain blouse with properly long skirt are required for female students.
Originally, the university uniform was adapted from uniform worn by Chulalongkorn's heirs. Later, the uniform was changed into more modernized version but original one is reserved as a formal uniform. Formal uniform is usually worn by student leaders and bachelor graduates.
Today, the normal uniform for male undergraduate students are plain white shirt with long or short sleeves and black (or dark blue) trousers. Dark blue necktie with colored Phra Kiao in its front is required for first year students but optional for higher years. However, black tie with silver Phra Kiao pin is usually used by higher year students in some faculties. For female students, they are required to wear short-sleeved blouse with fold along the spine. The buttons must be made of metal and Phra Kiao emblem must be pinned on right chest. Slightly dark blue or black pleated skirt and any black, white, brown shoes that conceal heels are also required. For female first year students, white leather shoes are required. Chulalongkorn University's uniform has long been template of uniforms used in other universities in Thailand.

=== Academic Dress ===

The academic dress of Chulalongkorn University is based on ceremonial attire called suea krui, which is long-sleeved robe made of very fine mesh. Like dresses worn in United Kingdom, the robe is open-fronted and calf-length. Cap and hood, however, are omitted. Colored felt strip decorated with gold-colored ribbon is attached to the margin of the gown including elbow and wrist. Bachelors and masters use black strip, while respective scarlet and pink are for doctors (including honorary degrees recipients) and lecturers. Yellow strip is used specially for the king of Thailand.
In addition, the colored yarn (bachelor) or ribbon (master and doctor) is added to the center of the strip longitudinally, according to degree-granting faculty. The gown was authorized for use by Vajiravudh.

==== Example of Felt Strips ====

=== Rain Tree ===
Rain tree is very common on the university campus. It was deeply associated to the university since the past. Fresh green leaves in the beginning of the semester represent freshmen's enjoyment. As the tree produces slimy pods and sheds leaves, the below ground becomes dirty and slippery. As a simile, it is described as a warning to students to be ready for examination. When they walk carefully, they do not slip (able to pass examination). Whereas if they walk carelessly, they would slip and get injured (unable to pass examination).
Around 19371957, many rain trees were to be cut down to allocate the area for new buildings and enhance cleanliness. The King Bhumibol Adulyadej recognized the dramatic decrease in the number of rain trees. Hence on January 15, 1962 the king planted five trees that he brought from Hua Hin in front of the university auditorium and said "Hence I give these five trees as eternal memorial" (Thai: ).

== Notable alumni ==

HRH Prince Mahidol Adulyadej of Songkhla, father of King Ananda Mahidol and King Bhumibol Adulyadej
HRH Princess Galyani Vadhana, princess of Narathiwat, Thailand
HRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, princess of Thailand
HRH Princess Sirivannavari Nariratana, princess of Thailand
Banjong Pisanthanakun, co-directed and co-written of a box-office hit film such as Shutter (which was re-made in the US as Shutter, and in India as Sivi and Alone)
Surakiart Sathirathai, former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand Foreign Affairs, Education and Culture and the former Thailands candidate for United Nations Secretary-General in 2006
Mallica Vajrathon, a sociologist, political scientist and former United Nations Senior Staff member
Win Lyovarin, a Thai writer, two-time winner of the S.E.A. Write Award
Binlah Sonkalagiri, a winner of the S.E.A. Write Award
Thanpuying Dhasanawalaya Sornsongkram, daughter of HRH Princess Galyani Vadhana
HRH Princess Sirivannavari Nariratana, princess of Thailand
Apinan Poshyananda, Director-General, Office of Contemporary Art, The Ministry of Culture and one of the top curators in the Asian region
Pinyo Suwankiri, Thailand National Artist in the area of applied arts (Thai architecture)
Borwornsak Uwanno, a Thai legal expert and a cabinet secretary-general under the Thaksin-government
Kiatisuk Senamuang, a professional football player
Sukhumbhand Paripatra, the 15th Governor of Bangkok
Suporn Watanyusakul, pioneer in vaginoplasty & facial reconstruction
Pakorn Chatborirak, Thai actor and model.
Yong Poovorawan, a noted scientist in the fields of pediatric hepatology, viral hepatitis and virology, and an expert on the H5N1 avian influenza virus
Chit Phumisak, a Thai author, philologist, historian, poet and Communist rebel. His most influential book was The Face of Thai Feudalism (Thai: , Chom Na Sakdina Thai). He also has been described as the "Che of Thailand".
Alexander Rendell, Thai actor and model.
Natapohn Tameeruks, Thai actor and model.
Urassaya Sperbund, Thai actor and model.

== International Reputation ==

=== Robocup competitions ===
The university Robocup team, PlasmaZ, got several prizes from the robotics competition as follow.
In 2005, almost reached the quarter final at Osaka RoboCup.
In 2006, the third place and technical challenge at Bremen RoboCup.
In 2007, second place Atlanta World RoboCup.
In 2008, finally the team got champion of World RoboCup SmallSized Robot League at Suzhou, China.
Moreover, another university Robocup team, Plasma-RX has participated in Rescue robot league at World RoboCup 2008, Suzhou, China, and won the first prize and the best-in-class in mobility award.

== Controversy ==
In April 2012, Times Higher Education raised concerns that Chulalongkorn failed to act against Supachai Lorlowhakarn, a senior government official who was found by a university investigation to have plagiarised his PhD thesis and who has also been accused of plagiarising an academic paper about organic asparagus production. Later, on 21 June 2012, the University formally withdrew the degree of PhD from Supachai Lorlowhakarn, the first time it had ever revoked a PhD.

== See also ==
Academic dress of Chulalongkorn University
Sasin Graduate Institute of Business Administration of Chulalongkorn University
Education in Thailand
Chula United football club

== References ==

== External links ==
Chulalongkorn University official website
Chulalongkorn University on THES University Rankings
cu-tep
cu-aat
cu-best